
December 1998
Your contribution to Goodwill will mean more than you may know.
To help you see how much your contribution means, I'm sharing with you
The words of people who have lived Goodwill's mission. We want you to
Know why your support of Goodwill is so important.
Your gift to Goodwill is important because people with physical and
Mental disabilities sometimes need an extra hand to know the pride that
comes with work.
"I was sad when I couldn't go to the snack bar to buy a soda. Now I
can buy a soda and spend money. I like working and making money. I have a
savings account. I can write my name on the deposit slip. If I wasn't
working here ...I would be sad ..." -- Maureen
Because turning welfare recipients into tax payers just makes
sense.
"When I first came to Goodwill I was a single parent with little or no
self-esteem. I was on welfare and without my diploma. Coming to Goodwill
was the first step toward my becoming totally independent. I am now
...totally off of welfare. I really like my job." -- Sherry
Because people want to work.
"I'd never finished high school. I had no experience or skills ... The
only thing I did know for sure was here's a chance to change things for
me and my children... I rode a bike to Goodwill in the rain and snow. I
wanted to be there ...I had my second chance to change my life." --
Donna
Because teaching a man to fish will keep him fed for his entire
life.
"Before I got to Goodwill, I was on a mission. I just wanted a job. It
didn't matter what the job was, I just wanted one. Now, I'm on a journey.
I've got more than a job; I've got a career. My instructor played a role
like no other instructor I've ever had I appreciate everything that
Goodwill has done for me." -- Cornell
Each year, we help thousands of people who face tremendous obstacles.
Their one common goal: they all want to work. A robust economy helps by
providing job opportunities, but to be honest, most of the people who
aren't working today are quite simply the ones who face the greatest
obstacles.
The kinds of services we provide help people deal with obstacles like
health care, transportation and child care -problems that are big enough
on their own without being compounded by factors like physical and mental
disabilities, illiteracy and lack of job skills.
Last year, Goodwill helped 3,300 people find jobs that increased their
self-sufficiency. Your gift to Goodwill will be used directly to support
services that will help even more find jobs.
Right now, there are thousands of people who do not know what it feels
like to support themselves. You can help them to know that feeling.
Please help Goodwill and help people find jobs. Use the enclosed card
and give a generous gift to Goodwill today!
Sincerely,
James M. McClelland President
Dear ,
A few months ago you received a letter from me telling the success
stories of people who got jobs with Goodwill's help.
Here's another story of success from what might seem like an unlikely
source: Goodwill's controller, Juli. She tells me that the 3,666 people
we helped find jobs in 1998 earned approximately $49 million dollars. In
addition to that, by helping them find jobs, Goodwill reduced the state's
Public Support tab by an estimated $4 million. Your gift to Goodwill will
help us do even more this year because your gift will be used to directly
support our work.
What kind of work does Goodwill do?
Goodwill finds jobs for people with mental and physical disabilities.
After Maureen's job coach taught her how to do her job in a restaurant,
we helped Maureen step out of the shadow sometimes cast over people with
physical and mental disabilities and find a fulfilling job smack dab in
the middle of society. Remember what she said in my last letter? "If I
wasn't working here...I would be sad..."
Goodwill helps people get off of public assistance. Sherry learned
through our Future Works class that she could rise out of the mire of the
welfare system and support her family. At Goodwill she gained in
self-confidence, in her vision of her future and in the job skills she
needed to find and keep a good job. "Coming to Goodwill was the first
step toward my becoming totally independent. I am now... totally off of
welfare."
Goodwill prepares people for life-long employment. Cornell found a
number of employment options that he never dreamed existed after a
work-site injury forced him out of his job at a foundry. He trained in
desktop publishing and combined his enthusiastic work ethic with
new-found skills in a burgeoning industry. "I've got more than a job;
I've got a career."
Goodwill provides jobs at Goodwill. After a lifetime of trials, Donna
not only earned her GED at Goodwill, she earned a job here. "I rode a
bike to Goodwill in the rain and snow. I wanted to be there...I had my
second chance to change my life."
Your gift to Goodwill will help the many people who want to tell their
own stories of success. Your support will help them go to work.
Please use the enclosed envelope to give a generous gift to Goodwill
today!
Sincerely,
William A Carter, Chairman Goodwill Industries Foundation
P.S. Your gift is a wise investment in the community. For every dollar
donated to Goodwill in 1998, we helped our "graduates" earn an estimated
$102. That money was then spent in a variety of ways, adding fuel to our
thriving economy.
November 15, 1996
Dear Personal Donor:
In the short while since Goodwill helped him find his job, Robert has
learned to thoroughly clean a motel room in about 40 minutes. His job
objectives call for him to do it in 30.
He has no time to waste.
Neither do we. With the help of friends like you, Goodwill has
continued to adapt our services to meet the human needs of our changing
society.
We don't waste time as we are helping the community. And we don't
waste money. The gift that I am asking you to make will be used to
continue our mission of helping people prepare for, find and keep
jobs.
In their December, 1995 review of the nation's best charities, U.S.
News & World Report called Goodwill one of the five "Standout Good
Guys." The magazine stated that Goodwill (as well as the other standouts)
is "uniquely effective, innovative or valuable."
While I appreciate U.S. News & World Report's endorsement, the
true value of your support is measured by the way Goodwill takes on
problems that affect all of us.
Every time we help someone find a solution to their employment
barrier, the positive effects radiate throughout our community: The
business community welcomes not only another worker, but a consumer with
increased purchasing power. Parents act as role models of
self-sufficiency instead of dependency. Tax dollars that would have been
spent on public assistance are saved.
You and I know that solutions to difficult problems don't just happen.
At Goodwill, it is the hard work of staff and those who benefit from our
services that produces the kind of inspiring results I see every day:
A Goodwill staff member addresses a group of welfare recipients: "You
can earn the money to support yourself and your family," she says. "You
can get off welfare. I know you can... I did."
A participant in a Goodwill program rushes back from a job interview
to share the results with his classmates in our desktop publishing
training program. once his tears have subsided, he confirms what his
classmates have already figured out: he just received a job offer -- his
first in five years.
Addressing a meeting at a neighborhood center, a Goodwill staff member
tells the audience how Goodwill can help them find and keep jobs. On his
way home, he shares the story with four people at a street corner. At the
next corner he tells five more.
In order to develop job skills, a man with some serious disabilities
begins working in Goodwill's industrial division. It takes a long time
for him to gain the self-confidence to work elsewhere in the community.
Eventually, he turns your support into a payoff for all of us. He proudly
leaves Goodwill to support himself.
These people and their successes are real. Just like the respect we've
earned from U.S. News & World Report. Just like the impact Goodwill's
work has on our community.
Real work. Real results. A real difference in people's lives -- in all
of our lives.
The people who can benefit most directly from your generosity have no
time to waste. Neither do the rest of us who feel the positive results of
their success. Your support helps provide real solutions.
Please use the enclosed response card and envelope to give generously
to Goodwill today.
Sincerely,
Jack Dustman Board Member and Former Chairman
December 10, 1996
Dear Mailhouse donor reminder:
You and I have done some important work together.
We've helped people break free of the welfare cycle. We've found ways
for people with disabilities to enter the workforce. We've expanded
Goodwill's proven methods to towns and neighborhoods where they are
needed most.
Of course, we've played different roles. You have helped make
Goodwill's work possible with your previous support. Goodwill has devised
the programs that turned your investment into results.
Who has benefited from our partnership? Everyone has. When you and I
help somebody find a job, one more person joins the ranks of tax payers,
fewer tax dollars are spent on public assistance and businesses gain
another consumer.
There are a lot of barriers that keep people from working: physical
and mental disabilities, history of welfare dependency and lack of
education or self-esteem. And there are a lot of people who face these
challenges every day of their lives. So our work must continue.
Everyone benefits from the work we do together. Many people need our
help.
Please continue our important partnership. Support Goodwill with a
generous donation today.
Sincerely,
James M. McClelland President
November 15, 1994
Dear ,
Think of your greatest accomplishments. Think of the joy and success
they bring to you and your loved ones.
Michael Sims felt that way at age 39 -- the day he earned a job.
Michael was born with cerebral palsy. Upon entering the work force, he
discovered few job opportunities that seemed to match his abilities.
For several years he performed packaging and clerical work. His most
recent job lasted only a year before cut-backs eliminated his
position.
For 18 long months Michael could not find a job. He resorted to public
assistance dollars to survive. Finally, Michael called Goodwill.
At Goodwill, Michael's counselors felt that his personable demeanor
could be a major attribute and identified for him a possible job-match
where his people skills could shine.
After three interviews, Michael proved that he was the right person
for the job. As the Clubhouse Monitor at Bent Tree Apartments, he now
provides customer service for 50 to 60 tenants each night.
At last, he has found success in a job that he loves. Now his goals
are set on moving up in the company.
Every year, thousands of people come to Goodwill. Like Michael, they
share two common characteristics. They face some barrier to employment
and they want to work.
With support from people like you, they can overcome their barriers
and earn success and the self-sufficiency that comes with it. And then
the pay-off begins for the entire community.
Individual successes at Goodwill mean fewer persons receiving public
support and more paying taxes. Last year, participants in Goodwill
programs earned --and paid taxes on -- wages of nearly $3.5 million.
Their successes at work also saved taxpayers more than three-quarters of
a million dollars in public assistance.
The savings are counted in more ways than dollars and cents, however.
The families of the new wage earners may feel the accomplishment in terms
of a house to live in, money to purchase food -- without food stamps --
and the beginning of a family focused on success, not hopelessness.
Won't you help make all of these successes possible? Please send the
largest contribution you can comfortably make. Your gift will help give
new meaning to the word success -- for people who have seldom had reason
to use the word.
Sincerely,
James M. McClelland President
P.S. Your gift will make a difference. For every dollar of public
support Goodwill received last year, we returned $1.59 to the community
in the form of earned wages and reduced public assistance payments.
Some of the strongest critics of our welfare system are the people who
have become dependent on it.
Their complaint: the system discourages working because unemployment
provides benefits that many entry-level jobs don't include.
That's where you --and Goodwill --come in. We help people train for
and find jobs that make it possible for them to get off of welfare. Last
year, Goodwill placed 511 people in jobs, more than double the number we
placed in 1993.
While the debate on welfare reform is gathering like a storm at sea,
the people who need jobs are floundering. We need your support to
continue getting people off of public assistance.
Welfare is not the answer. And welfare reform is an uncertain solution
with an unknown starting date. Goodwill works. Right now.
Please give the largest gift you can to Goodwill today.
Sincerely,
Jack Dustman Chairman
March 17, 2000
Name Address City, ST, Zip
Dear Name:
When Jerry was released from prison, he knew it would take hard work
and determination to straighten out his life. He knew he had made a bad
mistake, but despite his commitment to rebuilding his life, he just
didn't count on the obstacles that would be thrown up in his path.
Reality hit when he was unable to reconcile with his wife and ended up
on the street. He went to the Center Township Trustee for food stamps
until he could find a job and a place to live. The Trustee referred him
to the Blue Triangle where he consulted Goodwill's Career Academy staff
for job search assistance.
Jerry's Goodwill caseworker found him a job immediately. But Jerry's
troubles didn't end there. The seasonal construction job he obtained soon
ended, and he returned to Career Academy for help once more. Unemployed,
homeless and with a prison record, Jerry now faced going back to prison
for failure to pay child support.
It took some time and hard work, but with the help of Goodwill, Jerry
was able to work out a payment plan with the prosecutor's office, find
housing and conduct a more thorough job search.
With unemployment at its lowest point in years in central Indiana,
many people still have a hard time finding meaningful employment. Of the
more than 42,000 people Goodwill served in 1999, over 5,000 of them have
multiple barriers to finding and keeping a job. Some, like Jerry, are
ex-offenders. Some are blind, deaf or have other physical disabilities.
More than 100 were homeless.
But Goodwill offers hope even to people with numerous obstacles to
overcome, like Jerry. With a promising new job at a plastic injection
molding manufacturer, his legal troubles in check and a safe place to
live, Jerry can get on with the business of building a life for himself
and contributing to his community. For as long as he needs it, Goodwill
will continue to help.
Your support of Goodwill will provide job training and placement
services to help the hardest to serve in central Indiana find meaningful
employment. And, with your assistance, Goodwill can help employers
develop resources to keep workers on the job.
Please make an investment in the stability of our community by sending
a gift to Goodwill. Your generosity will help people help themselves.
Sincerely,
James M. McClelland President
June 21, 1999
Name Address City, ST Zip
Dear ,
Do you remember the combination of elation and apprehension you felt
when you first left home? The young adults who leave Pleasant Run have
those same feelings. Very few have family support to get them started.
Many need furniture, linens and other basic necessities to begin lives on
their own.
To help them establish themselves in the community, the Pleasant Run
Emancipation fund was begun in 1993 by private donors who wanted to
provide a measure of financial support for those leaving our
programs.
Individuals who are being emancipated are eligible to receive up to
$500 from the Fund if they formally apply and meet four requirements: 1.
Release by the courts 2. Successful completion of all life skills tests
3. Positive termination of his or her Pleasant Run program 4. Possession
of a high school diploma or GED
Proof of meeting these, two staff reference letters and an essay
stating why they should receive a grant and how it will be used are all
reviewed by a Pleasant Run panel, which determines if the applicant
merits the funds.
Such fund are often used for college tuition, vocational training or a
deposit on an apartment.
Because Pleasant Run is the only "family" for so many, our
Emancipation Fund is one way we can help a young person take the first
steps into his or her new life as an independent and productive
adult.
Without private donor support, this Fund doesn't exist. Please take a
few minutes to send a donation to help one or more of our children
successfully cross that threshold into the future.
Sincerely,
Mary Roth Executive Director
November 27, 1995
Dear Friend:
What kind of people benefit by your contribution to Pleasant Run
Children's Homes?
Little ones, like Baby Jessica, caught in the struggle between
adoptive and birth parents. Older kids, like Tracy and Kerry, left
homeless after a recent murder-suicide in Indianapolis claimed Mom and
Dad. Young adults, like Mary T., a jobless mother of three, trying
desperately to keep her kids out of trouble in a crime-ridden
neighborhood. Real people!
There are thousands more. Families are being torn apart, and too
often, children are the victims. Kids like Tommie J., made a ward of the
court because of repeated beatings by an alcoholic father; Alice, sent to
a group home to get help because of severe behavior disorders; and John
H., a recovering alcoholic, rebuilding a relationships with his family so
they can live together again.
Pleasant Run Children's Homes began serving children nearly 130 years
ago. Then the task was to help children who lost parents in the Civil
War. Today, we serve children and families with a multitude of problems:
emotional, physical, psychological and sexual abuse. Some come from
families where, through therapy, there is hope for reunification. For
others, "families" are the counselors are housemates at the group homes
where they live.
The biggest tragedy is that the problems don't go away; they only
grow. In 1994 Pleasant Run served 346 children and 125 families. In 1995
we will serve over 850 children and 340 families. In 1996, these figures
will triple. The children and families who come to Pleasant Run are given
the opportunity to become happy, loving, and productive members of our
society. They welcome the chance to belong, to become self- sufficient,
to regain their self-esteem and confidence. Often it is a long, hard
struggle, but the results are well worth it.
For Pleasant Run to continue to serve abused and neglected children
and their families, we need your support. The Funding sources are
shrinking, but the needs grow explosively. Please "help good kids get
better" by sending us a contribution today. Your gift will give children
and families hope for improved tomorrows.
Sincerely,
Mary Roth
June 26, 1995
Dear Friend:
This is not newsletter. It is a fund-raising appeal.
But there's no reason why we shouldn't share good news at the same
time. Federal, state and local governments are freezing or withdrawing
much-needed funding sources for people who are truly in need. In spite of
that, Pleasant Run Children's Homes, with the help of hundreds of
volunteers and others who really care, continues to make a significant
impact on the futures of families and kids in need of help.
We all hear about today's increases in neglect, abuse and abandonment
of those who can't fight back: children. Yet few of us hear enough about
kids who live through these adversities and do make the grade.
The positive side. These are special children. They come into a
Pleasant Run program... whether it's for therapeutic help in their own
homes (which nurtures whole families), through foster care families or in
the familial surroundings of our residential homes.
For some, it's a matter of weeks or months; for others, it's years.
They leave Pleasant Run, generally, ready and able to contribute to
society. We're proud of our children and all that they overcome.
We are a not-for-profit, multi-service agency. We wouldn't exist if
the need weren't there. The numbers of children who deserve our services
are rising... as quickly as our programs can grow to serve them.
Please help us help them. Pleasant Run Children's Homes... "where good
kids get better."
Sincerely,
Mary Roth Tom Hirschauer
Dear Friends of Pleasant Run:
The holiday season is the time of year when we're all busy buying
gifts, baking goodies, decorating our homes and making arrangements to be
with family and friends. This is the time of year when we give thanks for
the warmth and love that surrounds us. And this time of year is an
occasion to remember those not as fortunate as we are.
Pleasant Run cares for at-risk children and families. We do this
through a wide range of programs including community- based, therapeutic
foster care, group homes and our treatment center. Many of the children
are victims of abuse or live in unstable homes.
Today we are asking you to take a few minutes to consider making a
contribution to Pleasant Run to help the 1,500 children families we care
for. Many of the children have no homes; no memories of joy from past
holidays. Others are from families that are struggling to provide a
healthy, happy environment but don't have the resources to make it
possible. Your contribution will make a difference in a child's life. It
may help a family stay together. It can certainly make happy holiday
memories.
A gift to Pleasant Run means the children in our care will have
presents to open. A gift means a family will have a holiday meal, cooking
utensils to prepare the meal and dishes to serve it on. Your gift will go
beyond the holiday season. It can help purchase clothing, school
supplies, books and educational tools throughout the year.
Please take a few minutes to mail a donation to Pleasant run. Let our
families and children know that you want them to have the same kinds of
memories of the holidays you will have.
We wish you and your family a new year full of joy and love.
Sincerely,
Mary Roth Executive Director
It's hard to believe that the holiday season is only two months away.
At Pleasant Run, Inc. we are making plans and arrangements for our
children and families.
Every year we seek companies, organizations and individuals to sponsor
one or more of our families. These families are participants in our
community-based programs. These programs focus on keeping the family
together by providing counseling and other services to the entire family.
After our caseworkers meet with these families and their children they
often find they lack even the basic necessities such as cooking utensils,
beds, cleaning supplies, etc. We meet these needs immediately. But, the
holiday season is a particularly difficult time for these families. They
do not have the resources necessary to purchase gifts or food for a
holiday meal.
We are asking you to consider sponsoring one of our families for this
holiday season. If you are interested and would like more information,
please contact Lisa Lusk or Marcia Whited at 693-9222. We would like to
have families matched with sponsors non later than xxxx. Thank you for
considering this opportunity to make this a memorable holiday season for
a family in need.
Sincerely,
June 1, 1998 BOYS & Girls Club OF INDIANAPOLIS
Dear Friend,
It's summertime, so it must be time for CAMP! Yes, it's that time of
the year -- the start of the Boys & Girls clubs of Indianapolis'
Camp. Six weeks of learning and exploring, sports, arts, and fellowship.
A time for a youngster to enjoy the fun and benefits of residential camp
living, dedicated staff and instruction, and a chance to make special
friends.
I know you're committed to ensuring today's children have safe,
healthy, and positive summer experiences. That's why I want you to learn
more about the Super Summer Safari Camp.
At Super Summer Safari Camp, there are daily sports, nature, and arts
activities. In addition to the fun stuff, important life-skills such as
self-esteem, leadership, and interpersonal cooperation are being
developed. Please read the enclosed brochure for more information on the
wonderful Super Summer Safari Camp!
It costs $225 to send one child to camp. Many members of the Boys
& Girls Clubs of Indianapolis can't afford to go to camp without
financial assistance, and that's why we need you!
Please make camp possible for all deserving Indianapolis children and
send in a tax deductible contribution today in the enclosed envelope.
Consider sponsoring 1, 2, or 3 children. No matter the size of the
donation, please know that your gift will be appreciated and make a
difference.
Sincerely,
Richard Dickinson
P.S. You can make a difference in a child's life. Sponsor a child at
the Boys & Girls Clubs of Indianapolis' summer camp today!
February 26, 1999
Dear ,
Kids today face overwhelming pressures, everything from trouble at
home to gangs and drugs. Youngsters often find themselves feeling
alienated and alone.
That's where the Boys & Girls Clubs of Indianapolis come in. We
reach out to kids -- especially those from disadvantaged neighborhoods
where the risks are highest. We give them a chance to realize their own
potential by giving them a place where they can develop a sense of
competence, of usefulness, a sense of belonging and of influence.
To accomplish this, the five area Boys & Girls Clubs of
Indianapolis must be open and available when the kids need them, with the
staff and programs the kids need to reach and grow into responsible and
caring citizens.
This costs money. Money for programs, for equipment, and for repairs
and improvements to club facilities. Your contribution last year of
helped us get where we are today. We are counting on you now to help us
get where we need to be tomorrow. Would you please consider a gift of the
same in 1999?
Please, give generously. The kids are depending on you.
Respectfully,
James Campbell President of the Board Deputy Chief, Indianapolis
Police Department
A United Way Agency
Please detach and return in the enclosed envelope.
Come one, Come all to the Inaugural Jameson Grill
The only fund raising event in the world where you can bring your
entire family, other employees, or maybe even your neighbors.
Saturday, September 20,1997, from 2:00 p.m. until 7:00 p.m., marks a
special day, as Jameson Camp will hold its first ever Jameson Grill. A
fund raiser dedicated to you and your family having fun!!
For this event, when you purchase a corporate picnic table, you will
be able to bring 16 people. (and if you need room for a couple of more,
we can swing that too!)
The Grill will feature enough activities that you and your kids will
have a tough time deciding what to do. From basketball, kickball,
volleyball, archery, crafts, an egg toss, and even a walk through our
creek, you will have plenty to do to get you good and hungry.
Hungry, you bet! We'll prepare a hog roast and hot dogs for the kids,
with all the fixings.
In addition, we will have soft drinks and a raffle, so that you can
walk home with a great prize!
The Jameson Grill has been designed to be nothing but fun for you,
your family, employees, and maybe even your neighbors.
Join in this wonderful event and help Jameson Camp continue to provide
the year-round support that gives kids a chance to create dreams.
Simply fill out the enclosed card, and we will see you at the
Grill!
One of our volunteers will be contacting you soon.
Questions? Call Pat Bray at 241-2661 or e-mail, jcfundrzr@aol.com
July 11, 1997
Name Address City, State Zip
Dear Mr./Mrs. Name:
We need your help in continuing the work of Jameson Camp.
Jameson is a not-for-profit agency established in 1928 to serve the
youth of central Indiana who have special needs. The camp offers summer
residential programs for children from ages 7-17, and continues contact
with the campers and their families with special overnight and weekend
follow-up events during the school year.
All children who attend the camp are referred by social workers,
doctors, teachers, counselors, and other professionals. Many of the
children have learning disabilities, behavioral problems, or come from
economically distressed families. The goal of our organized camping
experience is to improve the total health of the children socially,
emotionally, and physically.
This year Jameson Camp is planning an Inaugural fund-raising event:
The Jameson Grill! This event is designed to be fun for campers, their
families, friends of the camp, neighbors, staff, and anyone interested in
finding out more about Jameson. In short, Fun for Everyone!
The family-friendly event, September 20, 1997, will include a hog
roast, activities for kids and adults, prizes for activities, and a small
raffle. Lucky attendees can go home with a great prize. This is where we
need your help.
Can you help support this wonderful event by furnishing any type of
products or services that can be used as prizes for our activities or as
a raffle prize? Your contribution will help with funding so Jameson Camp
can continue providing the year-round camping experience that gives kids
a chance to create dreams.
Enclosed is a form you can complete and return to us in the
postage-paid envelope. Or, you can fax us at 241-2760, or e-mail,
icfundrzr@aol.com. Your quick response will help us begin organizing our
prizes. After we receive your commitment, we will contact you about
picking up your contribution. If you have any questions, please call me
at 241-2661.
We appreciate your support of our first event of this type.
Sincerely,
Pat Bray Director of Development
Help Blaze The Trail -- 1997 Jameson Camp Thank you for your last
Annual Fund Gift!
July 25,1997
Dear Name,
What a Summer!
And we're just getting started!
I hope you'll consider continuing your support of Jameson's special
campers by renewing your last gift of $ xxx. I can tell you we need your
help now as much as ever before.
All of our Six summer camping sessions are booked to capacity (and,
truth be told, with maybe one our two extra returning campers squeezed
in) and we have a waiting list of 60 children who are hoping to come if a
spot should open. Many more camper referrals are coming from new
organizations such as school social-workers and family counseling
agencies. It seems summer options aren't readily available for troubled
kids whose families have limited incomes, so we're doing all we can to
make Jameson available.
That "we" includes the Youth Leadership teens. These 60 or so campers
have takenon a fund raiser with a goal of raising $16,000 for
camperships. Two of them told me yesterday that as a group they decided
they had to earn the right to ask others for help by accomplishing
something real to help themselves. And that's from kids many people see
as a problem.
Even after the summer sessions come to a close, Jameson campers will
take part in year-round programs designed to keep that positive contact
with peers and role models alive and important. We've scheduled more than
15 follow-up camper weekends beginning in September and going around till
next summers camping season.
Please, consider renewing your support of these great kids today.
Sincerely,
Julie Marsh Executive Director
P.S. We know our follow-up weekends are going to be better attended
than ever this fall and winter. If you can give a little more to help
meet this increased expense we would appreciate your support.
June 10, 1997
Name Address City, ST Zip
Dear Mrs. Name,
Confidence. An understanding that, above anything else, success
requires genuine effort, a willingness to set challenging goals. Caring
about others.
These are the attributes we want all children to have. You help
Jameson campers reach for them. If these special children are to become
the adults we all need them to be, we have to lead them in the right
direction right now.
Jameson points the way for children who need that extra hand and I
hope you'll continue your support this year. You're last gift of $50.00
helped make it possible for us to provide guidance, encouragement and fun
to nearly 400 Indianapolis area children. And not just during the summer,
but throughout the year.
What has your support of our campers meant to them and what have they
been able to accomplish because you care?
The best indicator I can give you of the positive effect our
year-round contact has is the growth in and deeds of the Youth Leadership
teens. In just the past few years this program has grown from a few kids
and a few extra activities to a team of almost 60 young adults taking on
real projects. YL teens will make J.C. juniors happen again this year for
7 and 8 year old campers. A five day camp, J.C. juniors introduces
at-risk children to Jameson two years earlier than we could previously
reach them. That means we now have the opportunity to be a stable,
positive and important part of each child's life for an entire
decade.
The teens have also decided to raise money to provide camperships for
other campers because they know what Jameson has meant to them. And their
activities aren't isolated to Jameson. The teens have undertaken a
volunteer project to regularly visit with sick children at a local
hospital.
Please consider renewing your gift today. The kids need your
leadership now more than ever. If you can increase your last donation, we
would appreciate that show of support for the campers and their efforts
to overcome obstacles and create successful lives.
Thank you again for helping point the way.
Sincerely,
Julie Marsh, Executive Director
P.S. You make it possible for us to help special kids with learning
disabilities, behavior problems and economic disadvantages to gain the
confidence required to put genuine effort into achieving real goals. I
hope you'll continue -- and if possible increase - your support for these
great kids.
July30,1999
Name Address City, ST Zip
Dear Mr. Ratcliff:
CCI is a federation of 13 neighborhood-based multi-service centers
whose mission is to identify and meet the human service needs of
residents throughout Marion County in the most effective, efficient and
comprehensive way possible. In 1998, we served a total of 31,484
low-income individuals through job training and placement assistance,
youth and senior programming, family counseling, emergency assistance,
and much more.
As you can see from the enclosed map, your Target store is located in
the heart of four of our service areas. The centers that serve these
areas, Mary Rigg Neighborhood Center, Hawthorne Community Center,
Southwest Multi-Service Center, and Christamore House, have teamed up to
run an exciting job readiness program for 14 and 15 year old area
residents called the Summer Enrichment Program. Between June 21 and
August 31, 45 youth will spend 20 hours a week developing life management
and work ethic skills, learning the computer, visiting area colleges, and
interacting with guest speakers. The end result will be kids who have a
better understanding of and vision for their own future, be it college or
a career.
The Summer Enrichment Program will conclude with a celebration that
includes family and friends. We would like to offer our youth a small
reward for their participation by presenting them with gift certificates
from Target. Therefore, we are asking you to donate 45, $10 gift
certificates that can be used toward the purchase of school supplies or
clothing, in the total amount of $450. In return, we will recognize
Target as a sponsor during our event and in the event program.
Target is well known for it's support of the community, and we believe
that the Summer Enrichment Program represents your interests and concerns
quite well. I will be happy to supply any additional information you may
need and thank you for your consideration of our request. We look forward
to hearing from you.
Sincerely,
Valery De Long Director of Development
MMM F_NAME L_NAME TITLE COMPANY ADDRESS CITY,ST ZIP March 4, 1999
Dear LTR_NAME:
CCI has come a long way in the last five years. We've worked hard to
structrue the organization so that we've ready to move boldly into the
next century, and I believe that we have an exciting and successful
future ahead of us.
One of the areas we've decided to focus on is development. It's clear
that if we don't increase our base of private funding, we won't have the
kind of control we need to ensure the continued success of our centers
and the very important services they offer. In 1998, CCI served 31,484
individuals right in their own backyards. Where else would that many
people turn if CCI weren't there to help?
The community initiatives committee is working with our development
office to put together a long-range fundraising plan that will ultimately
bring more money into our centers. This in turn will help us to increase
and even improve the services we offer.
With this in mind, I am asking each one of you to make a personal
contribution of $50, $100 or even $1,000 to show that you believe in the
work that we do and are willing to support it with both your time and
your finances. This way when we go out to ask for community support and
are asked about our board giving level, we can show our in-house
commitment through 100% board participation. I also encourage you to seek
additional support through your company, church, or service
organization.
I know that our staff and committee members will be happy to go with
you to talk to these group if you need their help. We're at an exciting
juncture and it won't be long until we start seeing solid results from
our efforts. Your financial support of the development process is just
one step in making CCI a stronger, more efficient and ultimately more
effective federation of service providers. Please, make your contribution
today.
Sincerely,
J.Chris Graffeo Chair
P.S. If you have any questions, feel free to call Valery De Long at
CCI, 638-3360 x23.
July 30, 1999
Dear Name:
Question What do you get in 987,165 hours with 291people in 15
locations?
Answer 34,700 opportunities to change a life!
This is exactly what happened in 1997 when Community Centers of
Indianapolis provided its comprehensive, neighborhood-based services to
individuals and families all over Marion County. And we can do even more
in 1999 with your financial support! Just look at the range of services
we offer:
70,0001 career assistance for youth Preschool for young children
School Age Child Care for and children and youth Access services such as
emergency and holiday assistance for all ages Adult Day Care for seniors
Senior Case Management Aids Education for youth and adults Senior Social
Involvement Computer Training for youth, adults and seniors Senior
Nutrition meal program Day Care for young children Social Development and
Recreation for children, youth and adults. HIPPY (Home Instructional
Program for Preschool Youngsters) for families. Stopover crises
counseling for youth. In Home Services for adults and seniors.
Transportation for youth and seniors
CCI is a federation of 13 neighborhood-based multi-service centers
(plus one affiliate) whose mission is to identify and meet the human
service needs of the greater Indianapolis community in the most
effective, efficient and comprehensive way possible. Better yet, most of
these services occur in cooperation with private and public agencies from
all over the city - CICOA The Access Network, Goodwill Industries,
Indianapolis Housing Agency, City of Indianapolis, Indianapolis Private
Industry Council, Family and Social Services administration, OTC, Indy
Parks, and numerous community development corporations, neighborhood
organizations, and churches, to name just a few.
More than 34,000 people benefited from our services in 1997, and the
final count for 1998 could be even higher. We're asking for a
contribution in the amount of because you can't got a better bang for
your buck than to support an organization that impacts so many lives in
so many ways. Your gift will enable CCI to provide these and other
necessary services at a neighborhood level, face-to-face, where it
counts.
Please, make a tax deductible gift to Community Centers of
Indianapolis in 1999, and know that COMPANY is playing an important part
in meeting the needs of its community. If you have any questions, please
feel free to give us a call at 638-3360. We thank you for your
consideration, and look forward to hearing from you.
Sincerely,
Earline S. Moore President
Valery De Long Director of Development
August 4, 1999
Name Address City, ST Zip
The goal of MCCOY, Inc. has been to make a difference. In 1998, MCCOY,
Inc. led two efforts that, we believe, will help our community continue
to take the steps necessary to help all young people grow up and develop
well.
Participants in the Youth Outcomes Educational Initiative identified
three goals for all our youth to obtain: economic self-sufficiency,
healthy family, social relationships, and involvement in the community. A
short time later, the Community Youth Mapping Project sent 55 young
people out into the community to identify the resources they need to grow
up well: caring adults, safe places to go, and positive things to do.
One group of adults and one group of youth, through two very different
processes, have arrived at the same conclusion; our community still has
much to do if we are to help ALL of your youth successfully develop into
the responsible, productive adults who will our community in the
future.
As a provider of youth services, MCCOY, Inc. is here to support your
valuable efforts to develop young people. Recently, through a lot of hard
work and alliances with organizations like yours, some steps have been
taken in our community that will help young people continue to be
involved in positive activities. One, IndyGo in April adopted a
much-needed policy that all young people under the age of 19 may ride on
their buses at half the normal fare all year long. Two, funding was made
available this summer for youth organizations and churches to conduct
positive youth programming on Saturday evenings. Through the youth
mapping process, it was confirmed that the positive opportunities for
youth on weekend evenings were lacking. That need is being met.
As it has been an exciting year for all of us, MCCOY, Inc. cannot do
its part without the support of organizations like yours. Annually, we
ask several of our youth serving organizations to join us in our effort
to help young people grow up well in Indianapolis. Enclosed is a donation
card that will enable you to make Indianapolis a great place for ALL of
us to live. If you have any questions or concerns at any time, please do
not hesitate to call me at 921-1288.
Sincerely,
John F. Brandon, President MCCOY, Inc.
January 5, 1997
Name Address City, ST Zip
Dear Bill:
This is the time of year when our thoughts turn to ways to do things
differently, things that will make our lives better and improve the
quality of our life. As you begin that process this year, I would like to
ask you to consider helping young people in Marion County toward more
positive youth development by becoming a supporter of the Marion County
Commission on Youth, Inc.
MCCOY Inc., originally founded as a government agency but re-organized
in 1993 as an independent not-for-profit, is a county-wide youth services
coordinating, planning, and convening agency. Its purpose is to encourage
collaboration and cooperation between the various agencies, programs, and
systems that serve our community's youth. In addition to that
behind-the-scenes role, MCCOY has taken an out-front role in developing a
Summer Bus Pass, neighborhood youth councils, and the We Value Youth
information line. It is our goal that every young person in Marion County
have access to the programs and services that can best assist them in
their growth toward a positive adulthood.
I am hopeful that you as an individual and Meridian Insurance as a
corporation might consider becoming sustaining supporters of MCCOY. I
have enclosed a packet of information about MCCOY and its work as well as
an application with various options for supporting the youth of our
community.
I obviously can't tell the whole story of MCCOY in a single letter but
I hope this provides an overview of the scope of our work. I will call
you in a few weeks to discuss your level of interest. Please consider
joining together with your fellow citizens in support of the work of the
Marion County Commission on Youth.
Sincerely,
John Brandon Executive Director
October 7, 1996
Name Address City, ST Zip
Dear Name:
In the summer of 1993, the Marion County Commission on Youth began
what can best be described as a "new era" in its history. MCCOY was
reorganized as an independent, not-for-profit agency, separate from local
government. It retained, however, the same mission with which it had been
charged from its inception: to serve as a catalyst for effective,
coordinated, and collaborative service delivery to youth in our
community.
For the past three years, MCCOY has been actively engaged in
accomplishing this declared mission in cooperation with many others:
youth service providers, youth, funding bodies, and interested citizens
to name a few.
We have met with a number of successes along the way, most notably the
Summer Fun Line, the Metro Summer Bus Pass, and the development of ten
neighborhood youth councils. A Providers Council and a Youth Coalition
are building relationships that will hopefully bear great fruit in the
years to come. The formation of The Community Academy, a pilot project
directed at expelled students from local school systems, has come about
as a result of MCCOY's efforts to mobilize community agencies in response
to a pressing issue.
McCoy is actively represented and working with numerous community
collaborations where we regularly raise our voice to speak out for the
inclusion of young people in both decision-making and program planning
processes. One concrete example is a joint project undertaken in the
United Northwest Area in partnership with The Junior League of
Indianapolis and Community Partnerships with Youth from Fort Wayne,
Indiana. As a team, these three organizations are working with
neighborhood youth and adults to build a "Caring Neighborhood with Youth"
, mobilizing the assets of young people and adults as partners to build a
better neighborhood for all.
Since its re-organization, MCCOY has established its unique niche
within the community by refraining from direct service programming and
focusing on what it does best: helping to identify youth needs, convening
groups of individuals and organizations which can address those needs,
and moving toward collaborative solutions. McCoy has only one interest:
the well being of Marion County's young people.
McCoy invites the support of The __ Company Foundation in the amount
of $10,000.00 to support such activities as:
---- the co-ordination of youth leadership training and youth
empowerment efforts at the neighborhood level by means of
neighborhood-based youth councils; ---- the promotion of youth employment
opportunities; ---- the facilitation of ongoing discussions regarding
effective and efficient youth service delivery;
---- the provision of technical assistance and guidance to
neighborhoods which seek positive youth-adult relationships;
---- the development of community-wide supports for the positive
growth of all Marion County young people.
In the last several years, the business and corporate community has
recognized that the positive development of youth is directly related to
the development of a competent workforce. Youth who are supported and
encouraged by both a family and a society that values
Them have a much greater likelihood of becoming productive and
contributing members of adult society. While we have made significant
inroads, there remains much to be done and it is clear that we cannot do
it alone. We seek the financial support of the Foundation to help us be
successful in creating the atmosphere in our community where young people
can grow and develop well. Your contribution will enable us to both
continue and expand the good work we have begun in making Indianapolis a
city famous for its commitment to youth and families.
In our fund raising efforts to date, we have received the support of
local government, foundations, and corporations as well as the personal
financial commitments of individual MCCOY Board members. We believe there
is no more appropriate time to have a coordinated and collaborative
effort to financially support the services MCCOY offers to the community
as a whole.
Thanking you in advance for your support, we remain,
Sincerely,
John T. Neighbours Philip B. Roby President Treasurer
John F. Brandon Executive Director
July 28, 1999
Dear
Join us for the "Sale of the Century" at JCC Auction '99, on Saturday,
November 13, 1999. The 9th annual JCC Auction will benefit the numerous
scholarship programs of the Jewish Community Center of Indianapolis, a
United Way agency. Because you are an organization that cares, you are
invited to become an integral part of this fabulous event by becoming a
corporate sponsor for JCC Auction '99.
The JCC would be very pleased to welcome your organization as a
corporate sponsor. We are seeking to build partnerships between
businesses and our not-for-profit agency. As a sponsor, you and your
guests will have a special evening, knowing that your tax deductible
contribution will help support preschool, childcare, senior and
resettlement services, as well as quality cultural events in our
community.
Enclosed is a corporate sponsorship package that includes a sample
auction book from last year's event, JCC market statistics and an
overview of the many programs that will be preserved and strengthened
through your generous support.
One of us will call you to discuss how your company can become an
important highly visible partner with the JCC in support of our
scholarship programs. If you have any questions, please feel free to call
Myrna Weinberger at 251-9467, ext. 256. Thank you in advance for your
consideration.
Sincerely, Judy Laikin, Chair Auction '99 Sponsor Committee
October 27, 1998
Dear Name:
Join us for the "Sale of the Century" at JCC Auction '99, on Saturday,
November 13, 1999. The 9th annual JCC Auction will benefit the numerous
scholarship programs of the Jewish Community Center of Indianapolis, a
United Way agency. Because you are an organization that cares, you are
invited once again to be an integral part of this fabulous event as a
corporate sponsor for JCC Auction '99.
We are so grateful for your generous contribution to last year's
auction. Your continued participation is very important to the JCC, as we
work to build partnerships between businesses and our not-for-profit
agency. As a sponsor, you and your guests will have a special evening,
knowing that your tax deductible contribution will help support
preschool, childcare, senior and resettlement services, as well as
quality cultural events in our community.
Enclosed is a corporate sponsorship package that includes a sample of
your ad from last year's auction book, current JCC market statistics and
an overview of the many JCC programs that will be preserved and
strengthened through your generous support.
One of us will call you to discuss how your company can continue to be
an important, highly visible partner with the JCC in support of our
scholarship programs. If you have any questions, please feel free to call
Myrna Weinberger at 251-9467, ext. 256. Thank you in advance for your
consideration.
Sincerely,
Judy Laikin, Chair Auction '99 Sponsor Committee
Name Address City, State, Zip
Dear Name,
It's tough growing up today. We know that children do better when they
have a network of caring adults to nurture and motivate them. When young
people don't have that support, they need other resources for
encouragement to guide them along the way. Big Sisters helps bridge that
gap by providing children with the resources they need -- Big Sisters
volunteers.
Big Sisters are mentors and friends who empower girls to more fully
reach their potential, experience life's opportunities and perhaps begin
to dream. The relationships that are formed provide strong foundations
from which healthy values and strong self-confidence can grow, helping
youth become strong, independent adults of tomorrow.
This year we will serve over 1,000 girls through our mentoring
programs. This is an impressive number; but for each girl served, more
are left unserved. Over 150 girls are currently waiting for a Big
Sister.
You can make an impact by supporting Big Sisters Annual Campaign and
our $200,000 goal. If you are a regular contributor to the Annual
Campaign, I encourage you to consider increasing your gift by 10%. If you
have not supported Big Sisters in the past, please join me in doing so by
completing and returning the enclosed pledge form.
Early adolescence is the most vulnerable age for youth. But caring
adults like you can reach out and help. It's the perfect time to make a
world of difference.
Sincerely,
August 6, 1998
Dear Friend:
Adolescence. It is a pivotal time in the life of a young girl-when
small changes in her behavior, or the choices she makes, can affect her
future. It's hard enough for her to make good decisions when she's
surrounded by support. It's even harder when she isn't.
Big Sisters helps fill that void by matching caring, responsible adult
volunteers with at-risk girls, ages 8-14. A Big Sister is a mentor, a
friend and a role model, helping a young girl to develop the
self-confidence and life skills necessary to become a responsible,
productive and successful adult. Your $1,000 contribution can put a
mentor in a child's life-and hope in a child's future.
The results of an 18-month study completed by Public/Private Ventures
showed that children participating in one-to-one Big Sister and Big
Brother matches for just one year, reduced first time drug use by 46%;
lowered school absenteeism by 52%; cut aggressive behavior by 33%;
enhanced school performance; and improved relations with family and
friends.
This is positive proof that Big Sisters one-to-one mentoring program
helps change lives. Today, we are offering you the opportunity to help
change a life. By contributing $1,000 you can support one match for one
year. This money maintains the infrastructure that fosters and supports
the development of effective relationships. This includes a volunteer
screening process, orientation, training and ongoing supervision and
support by a professional staff.
As a Matchmaker you will receive a description of "your match" and be
identified as a Matchmaker on a plaque in the Big Sisters office, in the
agency newsletter and annual report.
Today Big Sisters serves over 1,000 girls in central Indiana. But for
each girl served, more are left unserved. Over 235 girls are currently
waiting for a Big Sister. Imagine the difference the community could make
if each congregation pledged its support of one Big Sisters match!
I encourage you to Join me in presenting this matchmaker challenge to
your congregation.
Sincerely,
Dr. Linda McCoy Pastor, THE GARDEN A Blossom of St. Luke's United
Methodist Church
August 10, 1999
Mr. Caring Philanthropy 01234 Giving Way Contribution, USA 56789
Dear Mr. Philanthropy,
"The urgency you feel to make changes is just the extent that change
will be made. Do not sit this one out. Do not play it safe. Understand
the world and change it where it needs to be changed... Make our society
better. Make a world worthy of the children that your generation will
bear." -- Carl Sagan
You can help make positive changes in the lives of at-risk youth in
central Indiana. We often hear about economic poverty, but what some of
these young people are growing up with is emotional poverty-they have
often given up on hope and the possibility of a successful future. With
your help, we can change that.
Many Little Sisters are preparing to go back to school this fall full
of hope and with a positive outlook. Thanks to our Big Sisters
volunteers, these young people are self-confident, believe in themselves
and are beginning to realize their full potential. A recent study by
Public/Private Ventures (PPV) showed that girls who had a Big Sister for
just one year:
reduced first-time drug use by 46% lowered school absenteeism by 52%
cut violent behavior by 33% enhanced school performance showed improved
peer and family relationships
Former Little Sister Amy, now 18-years old, is a testament to the Big
Sisters program.
"I was matched with my Big Sister in June of 1992. Since then, she and
I have grown very close and I have been able to experience lots of new
things. We go to movies, dinner, concerts, and other stuff like that, but
I have also been able to participate in charity events and fundraiser
type things.
Not only did I have a lot of fun with my Big Sister, but I learned a
lot from her too. I have become more open-minded, more responsible, and,
most importantly, I have gained a lot more self-confidence. I am very
thankful to the Big Sisters program for allowing me this very special
opportunity.
In 1998, Big Sisters served 972 young people through its many
programs. But the need is still great. Over 170 young people are still
waiting for a mentor.
You are an important part in making sure these young people are
matched with caring adult mentors. Will you make a financial gift to Big
Sisters in 1999 that will ensure that more young people receive the
guidance they need, that more young people stay in school, stay off drugs
and make good choices?
Your contribution will be used to recruit and retain quality
volunteers. It will also be used to help maintain the infrastructure that
fosters and supports the development of effective relationships,
including volunteer orientation and training and ongoing supervision and
support by a professional staff. This year your gift can go farther!
Gifts of $100 or more will be matched thanks to a special 25th
Anniversary $100,000 Challenge Grant and will be placed in the Growth For
Girls Fund. This fund will support the goal of having 550 mentoring
relationships by the end of 1999 and 1,200 by the end of 2004.
If you would like to find out more about the Big Sisters program,
please call us, (317) 634-6102 and ask for Ellen Robinson. Thank you very
much for your time, attention and consideration.
Sincerely,
Andrew T. Burns Patron Relations Chairperson
P.S. When you give to Big Sisters, you can get 50% back! For a minimum
contribution of $250, you become eligible for a 50% Indiana state tax
credit through the Indiana Department of Commerce Neighborhood Assistance
Program (NAP). A limited number of credits are available. To receive an
application form, check the NAP box on the enclosed pledge card or call
us, (317) 634-6102, ext. 20.
March 29, 1999
Name Address City, ST Zip
Dear Name:
The 1999 Invest in Youth Campaign is in full swing. As a former board
member, the success of the YMCA is still important to me. We must be able
to reach all youth and families interested in values-based programs. The
Invest in Youth campaign helps insure this.
New initiatives in the inner-city are taking hold. The Urban Mission
Branch is reaching out to middle school youth with programs based on
caring, honesty, respect and responsibility for themselves and others.
For some, these are very different messages from the ones heard in the
street. They are learning to make positive choices concerning alcohol,
tobacco and other drugs and to support each other when those choices are
challenged.
You have shared in the vision and the leadership of the YMCA of
Greater Indianapolis. I now invite you to continue to support the mission
and the message that is so important to building strong kids, strong
families and strong communities. Please consider joining the Chairman's
Roundtable with a gift of $1,000. I have enclosed a pledge card for your
convenience. We would like to announce the success of this year's
campaign at the Annual Meeting on April 27, so please return you pledge
or gift within the next 30 days.
Thank you.
Sincerely,
Richard H. Gilbert, Jr. Past Board Member YMCA of Greater
Indianapolis
Iraq clears visit by Ohio official
By Scott Montgomery Washington
The Iraqi government has agreed to let U.S. Rep. Tony Hall visit the
country next week to assess a humanitarian crisis that has festered
since the Gulf War of 1990, Hall's office said Monday.
The Dayton Democrat, who has traveled to other crisis points including
Sierra Leone and North Korea, will spend three days visiting hospitals
and other facilities to seek understanding why aid has been ineffective
in stemming malnourishment and other medical problems.
Iraq has been under economic sanctions since the war ended, which some
say have thwarted the country's ability to recover from the devastation
of the bombing campaign.
The Persian Gulf War destroyed much of the country's medical
infrastructure, according to a report by the World Health Organization.
In 1996 the WHO found that much of the population existed in a state of
``semi starvation.''
Hall will be only the second member of Congress to travel in Iraq since
the war, according to Hall's office. The last visitor was then-U.S. Rep.
Bill Richardson of New Mexico, who went to help a pair of U.S. oilmen in
diplomatic trouble.
Hall flies to Amman, Jordan, on Friday, where he'll spend the night
before driving to Iraq. Flights are not permitted into Iraq. Hall is to
return to Washington on April 22.
Story Filed By Cox Newspapers
Ohio Congressman Arrives in Jordan
AMMAN, Jordan (AP) U.S. Representative Tony Hall arrived in Jordan on
Saturday en route to Iraq, where he is expected to look into the plight
of Iraqis after nearly 10 years of U.N. trade sanctions.
Hall, an Ohio Democrat and one of very few U.S. congressmen to visit
Iraq since the 1991 Gulf War over Kuwait, is scheduled to embark Sunday
the 12-hour overland trip to the Iraqi capital, Baghdad.
He did not speak to reporters in Jordan, but he told The Associated
Press before leaving the United States that he hopes to "separate the
humanitarian work from the political issues." 
During his four days in Iraq, Hall said he wanted to investigate
reports from relief agencies that a quarter of Iraqi children may be
suffering from chronic malnutrition.
He said he would pay particular attention to what happens to food and
medicine entering the country under the U.N. oil-for-food program. If
supplies are not reaching the people who need them, Hall said, he wanted
to find out whether the United Nations or relief agencies needed to
handle things differently, or whether "Iraq needs to get out of the way
and let us do the job."
The Iraqi government blames the embargo for the malnutrition, infant
mortality and other hardships.
The sanctions cannot be lifted until U.N. inspectors certify that Iraq
has eliminated its weapons of mass destruction and the means to produce
them. Iraq says it has done so and has barred inspectors since late
1998.
At least one other congressman has visited Iraq. Energy Secretary Bill
Richardson went to Baghdad in 1995 while a representative for New
Mexico.
Lawmaker Appeals for Innocent Iraqis
By HASSAN ABDULWAHAB, Associated Press Writer BASRA, Iraq (AP)
A U.S. lawmaker assessing the impact of U.N. sanctions on Iraq said
Wednesday it is important not only to force Baghdad to give up its
weapons of mass destruction but also to do more to ease the hardships on
ordinary Iraqis.
Rep. Tony Hall, D-Ohio, did not call for a lifting of sanctions imposed
on Iraq for its 1990 invasion of Kuwait, but said the United Nations
should make sure that sanctions do not hurt innocent Iraqis.
"It was very, very important" to compel Iraq to rid itself of weapons
of mass destruction so that "it cannot use or export them to other
countries," he told Associated Press Television News.
But he insisted the international community can do a much better job in
helping Iraq deal with its economic and health problems.
One way would be to speed up the flow of health supplies and other
urgent commodities to the country under a U.N. humanitarian program, he
said.
Iraq says the United States and Britain hold up delivery of needed
supplies, using their clout in the United Nations. The U.S. government
says it wants to ensure that Iraq is not buying items that appear to be
humanitarian in nature but that could be used for making weapons.
IRAQ-POVERTY (Washington)
Rep. Tony Hall, D-Ohio, urges the United Nations to allow a freer flow
of food and medicine into Iraq. Hall, who recently returned from a trip
to Iraq, said U.N. economic sanctions have hurt millions of civilians
there.
By AUSTIN ZALKIN.
June 6, 2000
Name Address City, ST Zip
Dear Name:
Pat LaCrosse asked me to send this information inviting you to join
the Georgia O'Keeffe Circle of the Indianapolis Museum of Art's Second
Century Society (SCS). The SCS brochure I am enclosing will give you the
historic significance of SCS, as well as listing activities and specific
benefits awarded to donors at the Georgia O'Keeffe level. Your Georgia
O'Keeffe membership, please note, includes free admission to all
art-related activities of the IMA's Young Friends of Art group.
Additionally, I am sending traditional background materials on the
Museum and the two latest issues of our Previews Magazine detailing
upcoming events, exhibitions, and educational programs.
These are particularly exciting times at the Indianapolis Museum of
Art: Progress continues on the J.K. Lilly estate-Oldfields, our Ravine
Garden has been restored to its original splendor, and there is national
attention showered on our current exhibition of Japanese Painting.
(please see The New York Times article I have included.) With thousands
of trees and flowers in bloom, we are having a beautiful Spring!
Our extraordinary permanent collection, facility, and grounds, we
understand full well, would not be possible without the philanthropic
support of civic-minded men and women. In joining SCS, you join the ranks
of those who believe that bringing art and art education to the city
makes life better, richer, and more rewarding for the entire
community.
A Second Century Society response card and return envelope are
enclosed. Should you have questions or if I can be of assistance in any
way, please call me: 317.923.1331, ext. 248.
Sincerely,
ARLETTA B.NEWTON Donor Relations Coordinator Enclosures/
P .S. Both our Barefoot in the Grass family picnic (July 23,2000) and
the annual SCS Founders Day celebration (October 11,2000) are free for
Georgia O'Keeffe members. Mark your calendars!
Inauguration of free zone in Dubai for e-commerce
Dubai 10-28 (FP) - Dubai's Crown Prince Sheikh Mohamed Bin Rashid Al
Maktoum inaugurated a free zone for e-commerce today, called Dubai
Internet City.
The preliminary stages of the project, the only one of its kind
according to its designers, are estimated at $200 million.
Sheikh Mohamed, who is also the Defense Minister of the United Arab
Emirates, announced at the inauguration ceremony that "we want to make
Dubai a new trading center."
The minister, who has his own website, also said: "I want Dubai to be
the best place in the world for state-of-the-art technology companies."
He said companies engaged in e-commerce would be able to set up
offices, employ staff and own equipment in the open zone, including
fully-owned foreign companies.
The e-commerce free zone is situated in north Dubai, near the
industrial free zone in Jebel Ali, the top regional and tenth
international leading area in container transit.
The inauguration of Dubai Internet City coincides with the opening of
an annual IT show in Dubai, the Gulf Information Technology Exhibition
(Gitex), the biggest in the Middle East.
Launching the Electronics Free Trade Zone in Dubai
Dubai 01-82 (AFP) - Crown Prince of Dubai Al Sheikh Mohammed bin
Rashid Al Maktoom crown prince of Dubai launched today, i.e. on
Saturday, an electronics free e-trade zone which has been named "Dubai
Internet City"
The cost in the first stage of this unique project is estimated at 200
million dollars.
Sheikh Mohammed, who is also the UAE Defence Minister, said during the
launching ceremony "we wish to make Dubai a center of modern economy".
The minister who has a personal website on the internet, further said
that he wanted Dubai to become the best place in the world for the
advanced (hitech) technological companies.
He said that it would he possible for the companies working in the
electronic trade sector to make Dubai their headquarters, and to
establish offices here and provide employment and own machinery in the
zone opened to companies fully owned by the foreigners.
The electronic trade free trade zone is situated in the north of
Dubai, close to the free industrial zone in Jabal Ali Mountain, an area
which is considered to be the first in the country, and tenth in the
world for transit movement.
Launching 'Dubai Internet city ' coincided with the opening of the
annual information fair in Dubai which is considered to be the biggest
in the Middle East - Gulf Information Technology Getix.'
Even More "Proving Rape"
Chatterbox feels that the Wall Street Journal editorial page's
coverage of Juanita Broaddrick's rape charges against Bill Clinton (see
"Proving
Rape ," "More Proving
Rape," as well as Michael Kinsley's
"Readme"column in the current issue) cries out for the introduction of the
Scientific Method into the usually mushy business of assessing press
responsibility. With that in mind, Chatterbox hereby inaugurates the
Intellectual Dishonesty (henceforth to be known as the Indis )
Index . Here's how it works: Publications that refuse to acknowledge
(even if to refute the importance of) highly significant but inconvenient facts
in their news or opinion coverage of controversial events will score one
point for the initial offense. They will then score one point for
every subsequent issue or broadcast or Internet posting after the first offense
is noted by Chatterbox if they continue not to report said inconvenient
fact--and an additional two points on days when the news organization
runs a follow-up without making note of said inconvenient fact.
Publications receiving a score of 10 will be inducted into the Indis Hall of
Fame . Publications that get all the way up to 20 will be faxed a likeness
of Joseph Stalin. (Chatterbox would prefer not to invoke the phrase
"intellectual dishonesty," because it's pompous and falsely suggests that only
intellectuals can be intellectually dishonest. But Chatterbox doesn't know any
other easily understandable phrase that describes this particular kind of
offense.)
For the purposes of this survey, the Wall Street Journal will be
counted as a separate and distinct publication from the Journal 's
editorial page, because, in essence, it is.
The Journal editorial page continues not to acknowledge that Norma
Kelsey, the friend and employee to Juanita Broaddrick who is one of two people
partially corroborating Broaddrick's rape accusation, is the daughter of a man
whose murderer was pardoned by Gov. Bill Clinton. (A responsible account of the
whole controversy in today's New York Times reports that Kelsey says the pardon
had nothing to do with her corroboration.) The Journal editorial page
gets one point for failing to note the pardon in its initial Op-Ed by
Dorothy Rabinowitz on Feb. 19. Because it has published three times since the
initial omission, it scores an additional three points. And because it
published an editorial Feb. 22 taunting the rest of the press for not following
it on the story--and still didn't mention the pardon--it scores an extra
two points. That comes to a total of six . Chatterbox feels
certain that the Journal editorial page will provide some follow-up
tomorrow to tonight's NBC broadcast of its own Broaddrick interview, which
means that if the Journal editorial page continues to take no action it
will be in the Indis Hall of Fame by Monday at the latest!
Chatterbox considered but rejected the idea of awarding Rabinowitz bonus
points for having "eventually convinced" Broaddrick to grant an interview to
the New York Times (as the Times reports in today's story). But
the Scientific Method does not permit any tinkering with the Indis
Index 's scoring procedures. And besides, Rabinowitz's efforts on the
Times ' behalf weren't really unethical, just puzzling, given the two
newspapers' intense rivalry. When Chatterbox asked the Journal 's DC
bureau chief, Alan Murray, who exercised good judgment in not breaking
the Broaddrick story (and--full disclosure-- is Chatterbox's former boss), to
comment about a Journal employee's feeding sources to the Times ,
he replied: "I don't really have any comment on what the edit page did. They do
their thing, we do ours." Which is what Journal news employees are
instructed to say whenever the editorial page causes them cringing
embarrassment.
For her part, Rabinowitz explains to Chatterbox that her efforts on behalf
of the Times were more indifferent than the Times made them
sound. "Ms. Broaddrick told me Sunday that a Times reporter had appeared
at the house in the a.m., and that she had refused an interview," Rabinowitz
writes in an e-mail message. "I asked her why she had decided to talk to the
New York Post 's Steve Dunleavy, and refused a Times reporter. She
said Dunleavy caught her by surprise. She asked if I thought it would be all
right to talk to the Times reporter. I told her it would be--certainly
as all right as talking to Dunleavy. She said, 'Well, I'm sorry I didn't.' She
said she would if he called again. I passed this on to [ Times reporter]
Felicity Barringer during our second day's interview chat. So--that's how it
happens that in the New York Times piece today I'm
described--solemnly--as having 'eventually convinced' her to repeat the story
to the New York Times."
--Timothy Noah
Husbands and Wives
Chatterbox feels a little dense for not realizing sooner that the subtext
(and hence much of the appeal) of a Hillary Clinton-Rudy Giuliani Senate race
would be Wronged Wife vs. Neglectful Husband. By running against Giuliani (who
has been reported in Vanity Fair to have a mistress--he denies it--and,
by all accounts, has a sham marriage), the first lady could exact symbolic
revenge on her philandering husband while advancing the fortunes of the
Democratic party at the same time! That's almost enough for Chatterbox
to jump on the Hillary for Senate bandwagon.
The media conventional wisdom is that Giuliani would make Hillary Clinton's
marital problems a major campaign issue. "Giuliani makes Ken Starr look like a
patsy," cried Time this week. But, er, wouldn't that be kind of a risky
strategy, given his own problematic union? Many have already opined that the
mayor is too vituperative, too much of a loner to practice the congenial,
teamwork-oriented politics of the Senate; other doubters have pointed to his
hardhearted, uncaring social policies. The last thing he needs is to draw more
attention to these qualities in his personal life.
Giuliani's estrangement from his wife, Donna Hanover, is made clear in an
interview with Hanover that appears in today's New York Times . Hanover "would not say
whether Giuliani would run for the Senate, whether she would like him to run
for Senate, or whether she would campaign for him if he did. But she did say in
the interview, which was conducted before the recent frenzy of speculation
about Hillary Rodham Clinton's interest in the same New York Senate seat, that
Mrs. Clinton is a 'very interesting' person. 'I think she's dynamic, and I
think she's very smart, and she's an amazing speaker,' Ms. Hanover said." And,
for a punch line: "Ms. Hanover's press secretary, Joannie Danielides, said this
week that Ms. Hanover had no comment on Mrs. Clinton's potential Senate
campaign." Does she have any comment on whether Ms. Hanover plans to be Hillary
Clinton's campaign manager?
Indis Index 
Update: NBC, in its Juanita Broaddrick broadcast
last night, turned up an additional three witnesses who recall being told by
Broaddrick in the late 1970s that Bill Clinton raped her. This
diminishes-- slightly-- the significance of Norma Kelsey's possible
motives in verifying parts of Broaddrick's story. (One of the three is Kelsey's
sister, whose motives can be similarly questioned; the other two heard
Broaddrick tell her story but did not see her bruised lip, as only Kelsey and
Broaddrick's husband claim to have.) However, Chatterbox notes that NBC, like
every other responsible news organization that's covered this story, reported
that Norma Kelsey's father's killer was pardoned by Gov. Bill Clinton, and
remains perplexed that the Journal editorial page won't. Its Indis
Index is today up to seven.
--Timothy Noah and Jodi Kantor
The Entrepreneur Is the New Madonna
Dear Joe,
I know what you mean about being a journalist. Almost every assignment is a
challenge in a different way and it never seems to get easier. I often feel as
if I only get half the story sometimes, so I typically do a massive amount of
reporting that is most often much more than I will ever need. I think that is
why I welcomed doing a book--it gives one the ability to use so much of what is
left on the cutting room floor of daily journalism.
Think of all the good stuff we all collect daily in our reporting that we
never add to stories. Most often reporters recount these tales with each other
and with their sources rather than share them with the general public. Much of
it, of course, using the standards of top newspapers, cannot be used since it
is largely gossip we are repeating, although it certainly could make for some
very good stories. I often wonder when a really great fictional book will be
written about this era (probably decades and decades hence as it is too close).
In any case, there certainly is no lack of information available about the
moguls of technology now as they all become our current pop icons. I would
posit that Bill and Michael and Steve and Jerry have become the Madonnas of the
current age of stock market mania and celebration of the entrepreneur.
So the shift in the image of Gates has been an interesting one for me to
watch. The smart-boy technologist is now being painted as the whiny bully. I
personally always thought it was a risk to pin the image of Microsoft on just
one man--at AOL, for example, there was a conscious effort to develop other
"characters," for lack of a better word. So there, while you think of Case, you
also think of Pittman and Leonsis and increasingly a range of other executives.
Steve Ballmer, of course, is now getting a lot more attention at Microsoft, but
it still seems to be Bill's show over there.
While I did not attend the trial--I was lucky to be able to read your highly
amusing and informative dispatches, several of which made me spit up my lunch
laughing--it certainly seemed as if the image of Bill Gates took a beating and
the insular culture of Microsoft did not look so good. That's ironic, since I
think it was just that insularity that helped them, much in the same way that
AOL has benefited from being in the Virginia suburbs rather than in Silicon
Valley. AOL would never have existed if it had been founded here, I am sure,
since its employees would have been mocked into obscurity by the digerati. Out
in the D.C. area, they looked positively exciting next to all the
government-oriented contractors. I wonder if that means geography is destiny,
and it's still location, location, location.
From where I am sitting, I think the Microsoft trial has been the really
obvious turning point between the computer era and the digital age. I think it
almost does not matter what the judge does since it's clear that the balance of
power is shifting again, although it not clear where it will land. Will the
strongman of the era be AOL, AT&T, Microsoft, or one of the big media
companies? Or will it be none of them because the Internet allows and
encourages a plethora of strong companies and a complex interconnection of
businesses where none are allowed to dominate?
I always use two simple words when people tell me that one company--whether
it is AOL or Microsoft or Disney--is in charge of all our destinies: Babylon
was. That incredible empire dominated the world and I imagine it did not seem
possible to people living then that anyone could loosen that empire's grip on
humanity. But we all know how that story turned out.
Now I am getting way too philosophical, but this is my final missive, so why
not? Perhaps you could hasten a prediction of where this is all going. As for
me, I'll stick with my philosophy of reporting and, I guess, life--nobody
knows.
Cheers,
Kara
No More Kisses
In light of Secretary of State Albright's imminent trip to the middle east,
the New York Times ,
Los
Angeles Times and Washington Post emphasize the deteriorating situation
there. But USA Today stays with Princess Di.
The NYT states that when Albright shows up on Tuesday, she will "read
the riot act" to Yassir Arafat about cracking down on terrorism. Her goal will
be to get Arafat to come out decisively and publicly for peace with Israel,
telling him that there can be no more attempts at co-opting Hamas, and "no more
kisses" of its leaders.
The Times emphasizes the larger geopolitical context. Given that the
troubles on the West Bank have not only frosted relations between Arafat and
Israel, but also those between Israel and Egypt and between Israel and Saudi
Arabia, the paper states that the U.S. is now facing the prospect that the
moderate Arab coalition it built after the Persian Gulf war to contain Iraq and
Iran is falling apart.
The LAT focuses on new dissension within the Israeli government about
whether or not Israel should continue to maintain forces in southern Lebanon,
dissension fueled when an Israeli commando raid there late last week was
ambushed, with twelve deaths the result. Perhaps the most striking indicator of
a change of mood inside the government reported by the paper is the news that
cabinet member Ariel Sharon, who as Defense Minister in 1982 got Israel
entrenched in Lebanon in the first place, is among those urging a
reconsideration of the deployment.
Several papers have word that H and R Block has finally wriggled out of its
controlling stake of Compuserve, but it's the Post with the news that
AOL is set to take it over.
The Wall Street Journal "Outlook" observes, "In the U.S. job
market, the balance of power is shifting to employees from employers," and
states that "the retention frenzy was triggered in part by previous waves of
corporate downsizing," which left behind survivors who took stock of career
options and used Internet job listings and intensified recruiting to land
better offers, which in turn led to counter-offers and higher salaries. This
has led, says the Journal , to annual compensation rising 5-6 percent a
year.
Much of the continuing Diana coverage is spinning off into the realm of
meta- and meta-meta-pieces. The LAT , for instance, examines what it
takes to be a new "cuddly-feely" Britain born of the national grief experience.
But USAT and the WP also each run pretty newsy Diana pieces as
well. Both reveal that Tony Blair had conferred with Diana about a goodwill
ambassador job shortly before her death, and USAT reports that Le
Figaro says a dying Diana gave two crash witnesses a message for her family
and children.
Give the NYT credit for getting Mother Teresa back on the front page
and a bonus point for including some criticism of her in the story. "Not
everyone in Calcutta, or India for that matter, is unanimous in praising the
nun, whose organization was able to raise millions of dollars worldwide but
made virtually no significant changes in the social structure of this
collapsing city's poor neighborhoods. Salvation--hers and that of the destitute
she rescued from the gutters--was her aim, not economic or social development
as many others understand it, she said." It's odd, however, that in repeating
this charge, the Times didn't interview the man most closely associated
with it, Christopher Hitchens, or refer to the book where he set it out, The
Missionary Position . Hmmm, wanna bet there was a copy of the book on
somebody's desk at the Times though?
What's with the top-of-the-front headline the LAT puts over its
picture of Martina Hingis standing next to Venus Williams after beating her at
the U.S. Open--"Venus Brought Back to Earth"? Doesn't that sound like
celebrating a defeat rather than celebrating a victory? How odd--and a good
illustration of how trying to shoe-horn in a "witty" headline can drive you
into an idea that doesn't fit or is undeserved. Given that Ms. Williams'
parents are rather protective of her and that she is a black in a still
pretty-lilly-white sport, don't be surprised if there's a bit of a complaint
about this.
Fashioning Paula
USA
Today leads with Texas' settlement of its product-liability lawsuit
against the leading tobacco companies. The top nonlocal story at the Washington Post is the latest development in the Indonesian
economic crisis--a rare and boosterish Suharto press conference in contrast to
a further plunging stock market and food riots in outlying towns. The New York Times
leads with a comprehensive poll about American attitudes concerning
abortion.
In the Texas case, reports USAT , the defendant companies have agreed
to pay about $15 billion over 25 years to reimburse the state for expenses it
incurred in the treatment of smoking-related illnesses. That makes Texas the
third state to settle such a case, joining Florida and Mississippi. There are,
says the paper, a total of 40 such suits on file, with Minnesota's turn coming
next week.
The Wall Street Journal states that the plaintiffs' lawyers
hired by Texas to try the case will receive as part of the deal almost $2.2
billion in fees.
The NYT abortion survey, the first conducted by the paper since 1989, was
based on telephone interviews of 1,101 people and detects "a notable shift from
general acceptance" of having the procedure: from 40 percent to 32 percent. And
the pollsters also detected an increasingly acute sensitivity to abortion
timing: Sixty-one percent of those polled thought abortions should be permitted
during the first trimester, but only 15 percent in the second and just 7
percent in the third. (The piece notes that this last stat helps explain why a
focus on partial-birth abortions has proven politically advantageous for
abortion foes.) Nearly 45 percent of those asked to state the present law on
abortion could not give the correct answer.
The WSJ notes that the just-concluded football/TV deal will probably
mean even steeper cable bills in the near future. Some local cable
companies, the paper says, expect the fees they'll pay ESPN to go up more than
20 percent. And they're in the habit of passing expenses along to Joe Remote.
Even nonsports fans will be affected, notes the Journal , because ESPN is
usually part of basic cable service. (Which raises the question: Hasn't
technology progressed to a point that would allow cafeteria-style programming
choices by subscribers?)
A scan of the headlines found cheek-by-jowl on the WP 's Page A6
provides an interesting snapshot of the life of the modern Cabinet officer:
"[Ex-HUD Secretary] Cisneros's Ex-Mistress Pleads Guilty," "[Labor Secretary]
Herman Denies Allegations of Influence-Selling Scheme," and "Two Tyson Foods
Executive Indicted Over Gifts to [Ex-Agriculture Secretary] Espy."
The WSJ reports that, according to an MIT survey, Americans are twice
as likely to back a tax increase going toward the search for extraterrestrials
than one for gene-cloning research.
The NYT reports that today's issue of the journal Science will
describe an experiment in which people's biological clocks were reset three
hours by shining a bright light on the back of their knees. The finding, if it
holds up, says the Times , may lead to a simple way for airline travelers
to fight jet lag.
Yesterday's Los Angeles Times ran a story under the headline "Paula
Jones Works on Her Court Appearance," which, illustrated by pictures of Jones,
was all about the various looks she's had since stepping on the public stage.
The piece concluded that she's finally graduated to an image that's
"sophisticated yet soft." Today's WP "Style" section (that's the
opposite of substance, remember) picks up that ball and runs with it, with a
lengthy discourse on the new PJ. "It is," hyperventilates
the Post , one of the most jaw-dropping public make-overs ever." Jones
apparently has "smoothed the frizzy mane of curls that once reached to such
dazzling heights. Her makeup is now subtle and based on natural, not neon,
hues. Her clothing is inspired by the boardroom instead of the secretarial
pool. She has embraced the markers of dignity, refinement and power." In true
newspaper overkill fashion, the piece backs this up by consulting Cynde Watson,
national makeup artist for Bobbi Brown Essentials, and Steven Zdatny, a
historian at West Virginia University specializing in the aesthetics and
politics of hair.
The placement of these two pieces is a PR triumph, but one carrying the
seeds of its own destruction: If people know all this work is going into making
Paula Jones seem a certain someone, doesn't that just make it obvious that
she's really somebody else?
Stephanopoulos Analyzes His Own Crime
There was former Clinton aide George Stephanopoulos on ABC's This
Week this morning, furrow-browed and "heartbroken with all the evidence
coming out" against the president. Last week, when the Lewinsky story was only
a few hours old, Stephanopoulos popped up on Good Morning America to
demonstrate his concern. "These are probably the most serious allegations yet
leveled against the president. There's no question that, if they're true, they
... could lead to impeachment proceedings."
Is Chatterbox alone in thinking there is something strange and even
disgusting about Stephanopoulos' eager show of independence from the president?
The problem isn't so much his disloyalty. Political figures turn on each other
from time to time, for good and bad reasons; we're used to it. Stephanopoulos
wants to run for the Senate and doesn't want to seem a Clinton stooge. By
lending credence to the Lewinsky charges, and treating Clinton's familiar
defenses as the lies and half-lies they seem to be, Stephanopoulos shows he's
not a fool.
The trouble is that Stephanopoulos himself helped propagate those lies in
the first place. During the 1992 campaign, when Gennifer Flowers first brought
Clinton's philandering to public attention, Stephanopoulos--as Clinton's chief
spinner, distracter, and all-around bullshit artist--played a crucial role in
discrediting Flowers and anyone else who tried to point out the truth, namely
that Clinton had a disturbing zipper problem. (Don't say Stephanopoulos didn't
know. Again, he's not a fool.) Simply put, Stephanopoulos did as much as any
man to get the country into the mess he now so telegenically laments.
The 1993 documentary The War Room captures some of his efforts on
tape. Early in the film, with the Flowers crisis in full bloom, Sam Donaldson
interviews Stephanopoulos, who blames it all on the "Republican attack
machine." "Gov. Clinton has no character problem," Stephanopoulos declares.
Donaldson suggests that on 60 Minutes Clinton had admitted to
infidelity. "He said he had problems in his marriage," says Stephanopoulos,
correcting Donaldson's deviation from the pre-scripted fudge-phrase of the day.
(Today, of course, the president's defenders claim that Clinton admitted
infidelity on 60 Minutes and that the fully informed voters simply
didn't care.)
Near the end of The War Room, Stephanopoulos gets a call from someone
who apparently claims to have a list of Clinton paramours, which he is about to
publicize. Stephanopoulos skillfully bullies and cajoles him into keeping
quiet. "You would be laughed at ..." he tells the caller. "I guarantee you that
if you do this you'll never work in Democratic politics again. ... Nobody will
believe you and people will think you're scum."
You might say that Stephanopoulos helped invent the philander-protection
techniques that seem to have made Clinton so overconfident of his ability to
not get caught. He was one of Clinton's principal enablers, to use a word
employed by Maureen Dowd in today's New York Times . When Democrats
wonder why there is so much resentment of Clinton, they don't need to look much
further than the Big Lie about philandering that Stephanopoulos, Carville (and
a cooperative campaign press corps) helped to put over in 1992.
Now the dissembler and enabler has become the scholar and ABC News analyst.
It's as if Roy Cohn went on television in the mid-'50s to soberly rue the
damage wreaked by Sen. Joe McCarthy, without any apology for his own role. Much
has been made of the way famous wrongdoers (e.g.: Dick Morris, Marv Albert)
rebound too quickly in our celebrity culture. But usually at least a nanosecond
of contrition is required. Stephanopoulos is cashing in without even going
through the minimal motions of holding himself accountable for misleading the
country. If Clinton, as is now increasingly clear, was a time bomb waiting to
explode, then Stephanopoulos helped smuggle him into the White House and
muffled the ticking.
A Physics of Semantics?
Each of the chapters of Investigations broaches new territory.
Each is tentative and incomplete, pointing but not fully adequate.
Yet, I persistently hope, it is better to light one candle against...what? the darkness? the veil beyond which we have had no framework of questions before?
There are grounds, reasoned about by the best of philosophers and scientists of the past several centuries, to doubt a physics of semantics.
We are on shaky ground.
Yet when the first hard frost comes, when the birches have been swung, their crimson leaves scattered carelessly, when crystals splint shallow ponds and old egrets stand dark watch the coming dawn, long-legged, knowing how winter is thin, when the first phase transition of water to ice forms slight solidity across meadow streams, small creatures of flesh and concept tiptoe gingerly to some far side where, perhaps, something new is to be found.
We have lacked a physical definition of an autonomous agent, able to manipulate the universe on its own behalfthe egret whose foreboding of winter leads to lifted wing and steady, powerful flight.
The egret is as much a part of physical reality as the atom, and perhaps more than the vaunted quark.
But autonomous agents, we who do daily manipulate the world on our own behalf, we to whom "intentionality" and "purpose" are so inevitably attributed by our common languages, we are, by my definition of autonomous agents, also nothing but physical systems with a peculiar organization of processes and properties.
If the concept of autonomous agents were something like a usefulor more, a properdefinition of life itself, then autonomous agents span the gap from the merely physical to that new realm of the merely physical where "purpose" is ascribed by all of us to one another.
Semantics enters with purpose.
For this to be true, it is not necessary that the carriers of purpose, say, the same bacterium heading upstream in the glucose gradient, be conscious.
I hope my definition of an autonomous agent is useful, an autocatalytic system carrying out a work cycle, now rather broadened by the realization that autonomous agents also do often detect and measure and record displacements of external systems from equilibrium that can be used to extract work, then do extract work, propagating work and constraint construction, from their environment.
Know-how
Bring ourselves empathetically and objectively back three billion years to the mixed microbial community flourishing right about where most of us are now, plus or minus a modicum of layers of surface crustal material.
I want to say that the autonomous agents comprising that community had, individually and collectively, the embodied know-how to get on with making a living in the natural games that constituted their world.
Indeed, as I have emphasized before, a biosphere is a self-consistent coconstruction of autonomous agents, ways of making a living, and the search procedures, mutation, recombination, as well as behavioral search open to autonomous agents.
Those means of making a living that were well searched out and mastered by the agents and their search procedures became the kinds of "jobs" that were widely filled, the abundant niches of the bio-sphere.
There is in this whole self-constructing system a wider know-how, beyond the know-how of any single autonomous agent spinning eagerly in its microenvironment.
Yet, clearly, the know-how is distributed.
There is no autonomous agent, no one, who knows how the whole system works, any more than anyone at present knows how the global economic system works in its myriad interactions, deals, steals, hopes, and frustrations.
What in the world is "know-how"?
Philosophers distinguish between "know-how" and "know that."
I know how to tie my shoes and am learning how to play jazz drums.
"Know that" concerns propositions, most conveniently, human propositions.
I know that the moon isthey tell menot made of green cheese.
I know that the earth circles the sun, that the earth is roughly spherical, that chairs are used to sit on.
"Know that" brings with it the standard and nonstandard issues of the truth or falseness of propositions as they report states of the world.
Perhaps higher primates who are trained to manipulate simple symbols with apparent reference to the world also can "know that" with respect to propositions.
Unlike "know that," "know-how" does not involve propositions about the world.
"Know-how" involves procedural knowledge about how to get on in the world.
The cheetah streaking after the wildebeest, the athletic genius high jumping, have the know-how to do it.
Does a bacterium know how to make a living in its world?
I certainly want to say yes, without attributing consciousness in any way.
Watch the myriad subtle turnings on and o of genes, metabolic switching, mechanical twitching, sensing of glucose gradient, swimming and tumbling upstream to higher glucose concentrations.
It knows how all right, even if it cannot talk about how it gets on with its business.
But then, try to talk about tying your shoes or the skilled driving when you become aware some dozens of miles down the road that you have accomplished the tasks without paying the slightest focused attention.
Thank God for know-how.
Know that is a thin veneer on a four-billion-year-old know-how skill abundant in the biosphere.
But any autonomous agent proliferating alone or in a congery of other agents, it would seem, is also graced by the selfsame know-how.
If we synthesize autonomous agents in the next decades and they coevolve under our rapt gaze over months or years into a modestly complex ecosystem brimming with novel life forms, they too will know how to make a living in their mutually created world plus the boundary conditions we more or less intelligently impose on them.
The know-how is, in these terms, nothing but another view of the propagating closures of catalysis, work tasks, sensing, recording, and acting that we now recognize as inherent in the doings of autonomous agents.
The know-how is not outside that propagating organization.
The know-how is the propagating organization.
Semantics
All of which brings us, inevitably, to the brink of semantics.
It is simple at its roots, you see.
An incoming molecular species arriving in the interior of an autonomous agent really is (i) food; (ii) poison; (iii) a signal; (iv) neutral; (v) something else.
Once there is an autonomous agent, there is a semantics from its privileged point of view.
The incoming molecule is "yuck" or "yum."
I think the major conceptual step to yuck or yum is unavoidable once there is an autonomous agent.
And I think we have roughly the Darwinian criteria in mind.
If yum, then there will probably be more of this type of agent, osprings of the first.
If yuck, it is not so likely this lineage will prosper.
Once yuck and yum, we are not far from C. S. Pierce's meaning-laden semiotic triad: sign, signified, significans.
Like it or not, the glucose gradient is a sign, a predictor, of "more glucose that way."
Granted, the glucose is not an arbitrary symbol, any more than a cloud is an arbitrary symbol of rain.
In this restricted sense, signs are causally correlated with that which is signified.
By contrast, the relation between the word "chair" and that which it signifies, and on which I am now sitting, is arbitrary.
But can chemical signals in bacterial and plant and human communities be arbitrary from a chemical causal point of view?
If so, can "mere chemicals" be signs in the full Piercean sense?
I believe it is clear that mere chemistry in an autonomous agent can harbor symbols and signs in the full senses of the words.
Consider first the famous genetic code.
Triplets of nucleotides in an RNA molecule stand for specific amino acids that will end up incorporated into a protein.
The detailed causal machinery involves transfer RNA molecules with their anticodon site and the distant site to which amino acids are attached, the aminoacyle transferase enzymes that charge the amino acid binding site of each transfer RNA with the proper amino acid among the twenty amino acids, the binding of the charged transfer RNA's anticodon site to the proper RNA code word triplet, the ribosome that glides between adjacent charged transfer RNA molecules and links the successive amino acids into the growing polypeptide chain that hangs free in the cytoplasm, tethered by the ribosome to the messenger RNA molecule as it is "translated."
The arbitrariness of the genetic code is exemplified by the evolution of novel transfer RNA molecules, which translate a given messenger RNA code word triplet into a dierent amino acid.
As J. Monod properly emphasized three decades ago in a slightly dierent context concerning activation and inhibition of enzymes at allosteric sites on the enzyme that are distant from the catalytic site, the relation of chemical structures that achieve control of catalysis are utterly arbitrary with respect to the chemical structures that undergo the catalysis.
The same is true of the transfer RNA where the anticodon site is distant from the amino acid binding site.
Because of this, which amino acid is charged onto a particular transfer RNA is utterly arbitrary and controlled by the aminoacyle transferase enzyme that does the charging, plus the structure of the amino acid binding site on the transfer RNA.
Both of these can be altered without altering the anticodon-codon matching mechanism.
In short, chemistry allows arbitrary organizations of control relations.
It seems fully legitimate to assign the concepts of sign, signified, and significans to the genetic code.
It seems legitimate to extend that notion to much of the subtle signaling, chemical and otherwise, within and between autonomous agents, as exemplified by plants that upon infestation by a particular insect secrete a secondary metabolite chemical that "warns" other members of the same species that an insect infestation is happening and to turn on defensive anti-insect secondary metabolites.
The calculus that is Claude Shannon's elegant information theory has always been about reduction of uncertainty about the statistics of the source of a set of symbols.
Nowhere in the core of Shannon's work concerning the encoding and transmission of information does the meaning, or semantics, of the information enter.
This is no criticism, and is widely known and appreciated.
There is, however, just a hint of semantics in Shannon's view that the semantics resides in the "decoder."
I cannot buy Shannon's view unless the decoder is an autonomous agent.
If not, then the decoder merely transforms a bit string sent along a communication channel into some other discrete or continuous dynamicsperhaps a set of water-filled bowls is drained by turning on a machine that opens valves between the bowls and to the outside world in particular ways.
The patterns of bowl drainage upon receipt of the binary string messages sent along the communication channel constitutes the decoding.
But if the recipient is an autonomous agent such as a bacterium and the incoming molecule is a symbol-sign of a paramecium or an amoeba on the roam and the bacterium swims away and avoids becoming dinner, that sequence of events seems laden with semantics.
If only the bacterium could tell us: "Did you see that truck of a paramecium coming at me?
I've run into that one before!
I ducked under a boulder, and he never sensed me.
I made it home.
Pass me some more glucose please, Martha."
I will return in the next chapter to discuss such stories, for I will say that we cannot prestate the configuration space of a biosphere and, therefore, cannot deduce that which will unfold.
Thus, among other things, we must tell stories to understand the oriented actions of agents in their worlds.
Do not be overly quick to accuse me of anthropomorphizing.
I too know the risks, including the common claim that we can always in principle translate from "intentional talk" to the fully predictive causal account of the events in question.
But patience.
Not only are we unable to prestate the configuration space of a biosphere and predict what will unfold, but we also cannot even translatein the sense of necessary and sucient conditionsfrom legal talk to normal intentional talk, let alone from legal talk of Henderson found guilty of murder to a physical talk about sound-wave forms monitored and masses at space-time lines as a description.
Then let's just be naive for the moment.
The semantics of the yuck or yum coming into a simple autonomous agentsay, an early bacteriumis somehow linked with the embodied know-how of that agent in making a living, or failing to make a living, in its world.
The semantics of an event is some subset of the fully embroidered, context-dependent set of causal implications of the event, or signal, in question.
"For want of a nail, the shoe was lost; for want of the shoe, the horse was lost; and for want of the horse, the rider was lost," more or less, said Benjamin Franklin.
The semantics of the nail is some subset of this embroidered context-dependent set of implications of the event, or signal, in question to the autonomous agents in the coevolving system.
It seems hard to ascribe purpose, in the sense of acting on its own behalf, to a stone or a chair and easy with respect to an alga.
Of course, there is a sense in which my attribution of semantics to autonomous agents is purely tautological.
After all, I began by stating that a bacterium swimming upstream in the glucose gradient was acting on its own behalf in an environment, defined an autonomous agent as a physical system able to act on its own behalf, then asked what a physical system must be such that it can act on its own behalf.
Now, five chapters later, it is hardly an independent deduction that autonomous agents are the proposed organization of matter, energy, and organization to which purposes can be ascribed in the sense of being able to act on their own behalf.
My definition is a definitional circle.
On the other hand, while the definition is circular, like F = MA and Darwin's "natural selection" and "fitness," that does not mean that the set of codefined concepts surrounding my definition of an autonomous agent as a reproducing system that does a work cycle fails to touch the real world.
Stones and chairs are not, by my definition, autonomous agents.
All living cells are.
And the stunning fact directly before us, every day, is that autonomous agents do manipulate the world on their own behalf.
Watch a pair of nesting birds build their nest.
In short, once we have autonomous agents and yuck and yum, it appears that semantics enters the universe as the agents coevolve and behave on their own behalf with one another in the unfolding of a biosphere.
Knowing
What about "knowing"?
Daniel Dennett, in his fine book Darwin's Dangerous Idea , advances a hierarchy of forms of "knowing," if I may use that term, that have arisen in evolution by Darwinian means.
I find his hierarchy congenial and informative.
Dennett envisions evolution as a sequence of kinds of construction cranes that bit by bit build up higher-order entities via variation and natural selection.
I do not disagree, although I have placed far greater emphasis on the roles of self-organization in evolution.
Here, in Investigations , I am trying to point at the mysterious but utterly natural hopefulness in which an increasing diversity of broken symmetries in the universe creates the diversity of structures and processes that can constitute and identify ramified and ramifying sources of energy, detect those sources of energy, create devices and processes that couple to those sources of energy, and generate yet more diversity that propagates macroscopic order even further.
I wonder, in short, at the naturalness and self-generaticity of Dennett's cranes building cranes building cranes in biospheres, perhaps planetary geologies, and beyond.
But back to the past.
Dennett distinguishes "Darwinian creatures," "Pavlovian creatures," "Popperian creatures," and "Gregorian creatures."
A simple autonomous agent, say, a bacterium, is a Darwinian creature.
In its simplest version, the creature evolves by mutation, also recombination and natural selection.
For the moment, no behavioral learning is to be considered.
So one (or a colony or an ecosystem) of Darwinian creatures adapts more or less as Darwin told us.
At the next level up, say, aplysia, a nervous system is present, and the creature is capable of stimulus-response learning,  la Pavlov.
Indeed, aplysia can learn very simple conditioned stimulithe later analogue is the bell causing the dog to salivate in "expectation" of food.
At the next level (Dennett, perhaps properly, reserves this for us vertebrates) is the Popperian creature.
Popperian creatures, in Dennett's fine phrase, have "internal models" of their world and can "run the internal model" with the clutch disengaged, rather than running the model in real time in the real world.
This allows us lucky Popperian creatures to allow our "hypotheses to die in our stead."
I love that image.
Beyond the Popperian is the Gregorian creaturenamely, at least humans.
Dennett makes the wonderful argument that we utilize our toolsliterally stone knives, arrows, digging sticks, machine toolsto enlarge our shared world of facts and processes.
This enlarged shared world gives us more know-how, and more know that.
Cultural evolution, at some point, begins to burst out-of-bounds.
Hard rock music jangles the minarets of Iran.
Who knows what new cultural forms will blossom?
Chinese cooking lands in Cuba, and Cuban-Chinese cuisine is invented.
What's next under the sun?
Who can say?
I very much like Dennett's ladder of know-how, and eventual know that.
Without invoking consciousness, not because it is not worth invoking but because so little sensible has ever been said on the subject, it seems worth asking how much of this hierarchy could be realized by simple molecular systems, even without evoking nerve cells.
I would think a lot of this hierarchy could find molecular realizations.
For example, bacteria and amoebae do have a kind of Pavlovian learning already, for they have receptors that accommodate to a constant level of a given signal ligand and sense instead a change from the current level.
This is not yet the association of a more or less arbitrary conditioned stimulus with an unconditioned stimulus, but I can imagine chemistry to accomplish the latter.
As neurons are supposed to proliferate and form novel synaptic connections that survive if used and to mediate the linkage of conditioned to unconditioned stimulus, why not envision a complex chemistry, say, very complex carbohydrate-synthesis patterns sustained by complex sets of enzymes whose activities are modulated by the dierent carbohydrates themselves, which is true of contemporary carbohydrate metabolism.
Such a system might blindly try out variant patterns of synthesis until it could establish a self-sustaining web linking the carbohydrates, the enzymes, and certain protein receptors mediating the linkage between unconditioned and conditioned stimulus, then maintain that linkage by positive feedback loops.
The image is not too far from how it is imagined that "idiotype" and "anti-idiotype" immune networks work to sustain synthesis of a set of desired antibodies against an incoming pathogen.
In such networks, for which there is modestly good evidence, a given first antibody serves as an antigen that stimulates the body to produce a second antibody that binds to the unique amino acid sequences, called the "idiotype" of the first antibody.
In turn, the second "anti-idiotype" antibody stimulates a third, which stimulates a fourth.
But this series is likely to form feedback loops because the first and third antibody can often both bind to the same site on the second antibody, hence, the first and third antibodies are similar shapes in shape space.
It is not much of a stretch to think of the immune system as a conditioned stimulus response system.
Popperian creatures?
Why cannot the molecular-sensing and hypothesis-testing churning concerns of the bacterium as it senses a paramecium churn twenty cycles before kicking in the rotary motor, or not, such that the wee bacterium hides under a boulder of a grain of sand until the beast passes by?
Are nerves necessary?
Plants, as noted, are said to signal one another with complex secondary metabolites to characterize the particular kinds of insects infesting the glade.
There are arbitrary structural relations between the metabolite and the insect, just as symbols in human language are often arbitrary with respect to the signified.
Not bad for nerveless nonvertebrates.
I do get stuck at Gregorian creatures.
Even here, the free and open creating of new symbol strings in a language, wherever new sentences can be created, is not that fundamentally dierent from the persistent open creation of new kinds of molecules in the biosphere as a whole.
If the conversation we recent two-legged ones are having with respect to our digging sticks and atomic bombs is impressive, so too is the chemical conversation in any full-fledged ecosystem, where we are all instrumental in the lives of one another.
I suppose I am naively driven to consider that the biosphere, with its urgent diversity in which, emboldened by all our know-how, we do get on with a very rich conversation, may very early already have harbored all the levels of which Dennett speaks.
We humans are just more gregarious with our vocal cords and e-mail, I guess.
Smart place, a biosphere, lots to talk about.
Four billion years of yammering.
Slapstick comedy may have started a long time ago.
Ethics
And what of ethics?
Does a whiff of ethical issue arise with autonomous agents?
Yuck or yum from my point of view if I am an autonomous agent.
There are deep reasons for caution.
Hume told us long ago about the "naturalistic fallacy": One cannot deduce "ought" from "is."
From the fact that mothers care for their young, we cannot deduce that they ought to do so, Hume argued.
From the fact that Hitler set out to conquer Europe and more and to kill Jewry, we cannot deduce that he ought to have done so.
Indeed, Hume's injunction underlies the caution of scientists about making ethical statements.
We scientists find the facts.
You citizens across the globe can argue the ethics.
But if Hume warns us not to deduce ought from is, where do values come from at all?
Hume's injunction against deduction from is to ought nevertheless began by recognizing the legitimacy of the category "ought."
The eorts following Hume to understand the meaning of ethical assertions have been long, twisted, arduous.
Following the dictates of the logical positivists of the Vienna Circle that only those statements capable of verification were meaningful, philosophers as famous as G. E. Moore came to wonder if ethical assertions were merely emotive utterances.
"It is wrong to kill."
Becomes, "Agggah!"
Does the positivist argument seem persuasive?
It has always amused me that the core injunction of the logical positivists, "only those statements that are empirically verifiable are meaningful," is itself not empirically verifiable.
One is reminded of something about hoisting and petards.
John Rawls of Harvard has argued eloquently that our human notions of fairness derive from what we would all "contractually" agree to, were we to know before birth that we would all be born with diering abilities and endowments.
Thus "equality before the law" is one contract that Rawls commends to us.
"Equality before the law" is far more refined than the yuck or yum of the bacterium.
The emergence of ethics in the evolution of life on this planet is a fascinating issue.
I will content myself with wondering where "value" and the rudiments of "intentionality" come from in the physical universe in the first place and leave social contracts for other eorts.
Where is the place of value in a world of fact?
So, a short soliloquy.
Facts are know-that statements.
But know-how preceded know that.
While fully aware of Hume's injunction, I think that from the autonomous agent's perspective, yuck or yum is primary, unavoidable, and of the deepest importance to that agent.
I suppose we apply the Darwinian criteria.
Too much yuck, this one and its progeny are gone from the future of the biosphere.
Without attributing consciousness to an E. coli , or an autonomous agent we may create in the near future, I cannot help but feel that the rudiments of value are present once autonomous agents are around.
And again without attributing consciousness, once an autonomous agent is around is the rudiment of intentionality present?
If so, another cornerstone of ethical activity has been laid.
Ethical behavior requires first the logical possibility of behavior for which one is responsible.
You are not responsible for acts and eects beyond your control.
To act ethically, you must first be able to act at all.
But what are "acts" in the first place?
Daniel Yamins is a brilliant young mathematician.
Now entering Harvard, Dan spent a summer with me at the Santa Fe Institute before he learned to drive, after an earlier summer spent in the laboratory of Jack Szostak at Harvard, where, at age fourteen, Dan was learning to evolve RNA molecules to bind arbitrary ligands.
Dan and I struggled that summer to make the distinction between the "doings" of an autonomous agent and mere happenings in and around the autonomous agent.
Note we say the E. coli is swimming upstream in the glucose gradient to get dinner.
But all sorts of molecular vibrational, rotational, and translational motions are occurring.
What are actions and what are mere happenings?
I do not think we were successful in drawing a clean distinction between doings and happenings with clear mathematics.
But I sense that the distinction between doings and happenings, Dan's happy phrasing, is relevant for E. coli , tigers, us, trees, and autonomous agents in general.
We will meet a similar problem in the next chapter when we attempt to distinguish between the function of a part of an organism and the other causal consequences of that part of the organism.
Strange and interesting, is it not, that these issues all seem to arise with autonomous agents but not otherwise?
Granted that we here seem to confront the language game circularity alluded to earlier, yet I do truly think that the rudiments of semantics, intentionality, value, and ethics arise with autonomous agents.
I do not think those rudiments suce to jump over Hume's naturalistic fallacy.
We cannot deduce ought from is in any concrete context, but I think we have the categories of ought and is in the physical universe once we have autonomous agents.
WARTIME
After the attacks had occurred, while crisis managers were still sorting out a number
of unnerving false alarms, Air Force One flew to Barksdale Air Force Base in
Louisiana. One of these alarms was of a reported threat against Air Force One
itself, a threat eventually run down to a misunderstood communication in the hectic
White House Situation Room that morning.
While the plan at the elementary school had been to return to Washington, by the time
Air Force One was airborne at 9:55 A.M. the Secret Service, the President's
advisers, and Vice President Cheney were strongly advising against it. President
Bush reluctantly acceded to this advice and, at about 10:10, Air Force One changed
course and began heading due west. The immediate objective was to find a safe
location-not too far away-where the President could land and speak to the American
people. The Secret Service was also interested in refueling the aircraft and paring
down the size of the traveling party. The President's military aide, an Air Force
officer, quickly researched the options and, sometime around 10:20, identified
Barksdale Air Force Base as an appropriate interim destination.
When Air Force One landed at Barksdale at about 11:45, personnel from the local
Secret Service office were still en route to the airfield. The motorcade consisted
of a military police lead vehicle and a van; the proposed briefing theater had no
phones or electrical outlets. Staff scrambled to prepare another room for the
President's remarks, while the lead Secret Service agent reviewed the security
situation with superiors in Washington. The President completed his statement, which
for security reasons was taped and not broadcast live, and the traveling party
returned to Air Force One. The next destination was discussed: once again the Secret
Service recommended against returning to Washington, and the Vice President agreed.
Offutt Air Force Base in Nebraska was chosen because of its elaborate command and
control facilities, and because it could accommodate overnight lodging for 50
persons. The Secret Service wanted a place where the President could spend several
days, if necessary.
Air Force One arrived at Offutt at 2:50 P.M. At about 3:15, President Bush met with
his principal advisers through a secure video teleconference.
Rice said President Bush began the meeting with the words, "We're at war," and that Director of Central Intelligence George Tenet said
the agency was still assessing who was responsible, but the early signs all pointed
to al Qaeda. That evening the Deputies Committee returned to the pending
presidential directive they had labored over during the summer.
The secretary of defense directed the nation's armed forces to Defense Condition 3,
an increased state of military readiness.
For the first time in history, all nonemergency civilian aircraft in the United
States were grounded, stranding tens of thousands of passengers across the country.
Contingency plans for the continuity of government and the evacuation of leaders had
been implemented.   The Pentagon had been struck; the White House or the Capitol had
narrowly escaped direct attack. Extraordinary security precautions were put in place
at the nation's borders and ports.
In the late afternoon, the President overruled his aides' continuing reluctance to
have him return to Washington and ordered Air Force One back to Andrews Air Force
Base. He was flown by helicopter back to the White House, passing over the
still-smoldering Pentagon. At 8:30 that evening, President Bush addressed the nation
from the White House. After emphasizing that the first priority was to help the
injured and protect against any further attacks, he said: "We will make no
distinction between the terrorists who committed these acts and those who harbor
them." He quoted Psalm 23-"though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death .
. ." No American, he said,"will ever forget this day."
Following his speech, President Bush met again with his National Security Council
(NSC), expanded to include Secretary of Transportation Norman Mineta and Joseph
Allbaugh, the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Secretary of
State Colin Powell, who had returned from Peru after hearing of the attacks, joined
the discussion. They reviewed the day's events.
IMMEDIATE RESPONSES AT HOME
As the urgent domestic issues accumulated, White House Deputy Chief of Staff Joshua
Bolten chaired a temporary "domestic consequences" group.
The agenda in those first days is worth noting, partly as a checklist for future
crisis planners. It began with problems of how to help victims and stanch the
flowing losses to the American economy, such as
Organizing federal emergency assistance. One question was what kind of public
    health advice to give about the air quality in Lower Manhattan in the vicinity
    of the fallen buildings.
Compensating victims. They evaluated legislative options, eventually setting
    up a federal compensation fund and defining the powers of a special master to
    run it.
Determining federal assistance. On September 13, President Bush promised to
    provide $20 billion for New York City, in addition to the $20 billion his budget
    director had already guessed might be needed for the country as a whole.
Restoring civil aviation. On the morning of September 13, the national
    airspace reopened for use by airports that met newly improvised security
    standards.
Reopening the financial markets. After extraordinary emergency efforts
    involving the White House, the Treasury Department, and the Securities and
    Exchange Commission, aided by unprecedented cooperation among the usually
    competitive firms of the financial industry, the markets reopened on Monday,
    September 17.
Deciding when and how to return border and port security to more normal
    operations.
Evaluating legislative proposals to bail out the airline industry and cap its
    liability.
The very process of reviewing these issues underscored the absence of an effective
government organization dedicated to assessing vulnerabilities and handling problems
of protection and preparedness. Though a number of agencies had some part of the
task, none had security as its primary mission. By September 14, Vice President
Cheney had decided to recommend, at least as a first step, a new White House entity
to coordinate all the relevant agencies rather than tackle the challenge of
combining them in a new department. This new White House entity would be a homeland
security adviser and Homeland Security Council-paralleling the National Security
Council system. Vice President Cheney reviewed the proposal with President Bush and
other advisers. President Bush announced the new post and its first occupant-
Pennsylvania governor Tom Ridge-in his address to a joint session of Congress on
September 20.
Beginning on September 11, Immigration and Naturalization Service agents working in
cooperation with the FBI began arresting individuals for immigration violations whom
they encountered while following up leads in the FBI's investigation of the 9/11
attacks. Eventually, 768 aliens were arrested as "special interest" detainees. Some
(such as Zacarias Moussaoui) were actually in INS custody before 9/11; most were
arrested after. Attorney General John Ashcroft told us that he saw his job in
directing this effort as "risk minimization," both to find out who had committed the
attacks and to prevent a subsequent attack. Ashcroft ordered all special interest
immigration hearings closed to the public, family members, and press; directed
government attorneys to seek denial of bond until such time as they were "cleared"
of terrorist connections by the FBI and other agencies; and ordered the identity of
the detainees kept secret. INS attorneys charged with prosecuting the immigration
violations had trouble getting information about the detainees and any terrorist
connections; in the chaos after the attacks, it was very difficult to reach law
enforcement officials, who were following up on other leads. The clearance process
approved by the Justice Department was time-consuming, lasting an average of about
80 days.
We have assessed this effort to detain aliens of "special interest." The detainees
were lawfully held on immigration charges. Records indicate that 531 were deported,
162 were released on bond, 24 received some kind of immigration benefits, 12 had
their proceedings terminated, and 8-one of whom was Moussaoui-were remanded to the
custody of the U.S. Marshals Service. The inspector general of the Justice
Department found significant problems in the way the 9/11 detainees were
    treated.
In response to a request about the counterterrorism benefits of the 9/11 detainee
program, the Justice Department cited six individuals on the special interest
detainee list, noting that two (including Moussaoui) were linked directly to a
terrorist organization and that it had obtained new leads helpful to the
investigation of the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
A senior al Qaeda detainee has stated that U.S. government efforts after the 9/11
attacks to monitor the American homeland, including review of Muslims' immigration
files and deportation of nonpermanent residents, forced al Qaeda to operate less
freely in the United States.
The government's ability to collect intelligence inside the United States, and the
sharing of such information between the intelligence and law enforcement
communities, was not a priority before 9/11. Guidelines on this subject issued in
August 2001 by Deputy Attorney General LarryThompson essentially recapitulated prior
guidance. However, the attacks of 9/11 changed everything. Less than one week after
September 11, an early version of what was to become the Patriot Act (officially,
the USA PATRIOT Act) began to take shape.
A central provision of the proposal was the removal of "the wall" on information
sharing between the intelligence and law enforcement communities (discussed in
chapter 3). Ashcroft told us he was determined to take every conceivable action,
within the limits of the Constitution, to identify potential terrorists and deter
additional attacks.
The administration developed a proposal that eventually passed both houses of
Congress by large majorities and was signed into law on October 26.
Flights of Saudi Nationals Leaving the United States
Three questions have arisen with respect to the departure of Saudi nationals from the
United States in the immediate aftermath of 9/11: (1) Did any flights of Saudi
nationals take place before national airspace reopened on September 13, 2001? (2)
Was there any political intervention to facilitate the departure of Saudi nationals?
(3) Did the FBI screen Saudi nationals thoroughly before their departure?
First, we found no evidence that any flights of Saudi nationals, domestic or
international, took place before the reopening of national airspace on the morning
of September 13, 2001.   To the contrary, every flight we have identified occurred
after national airspace reopened.
Second, we found no evidence of political intervention. We found no evidence that
anyone at the White House above the level of Richard Clarke participated in a
decision on the departure of Saudi nationals. The issue came up in one of the many
video teleconferences of the interagency group Clarke chaired, and Clarke said he
approved of how the FBI was dealing with the matter when it came up for interagency
discussion at his level. Clarke told us, "I asked the FBI, Dale Watson . . . to
handle that, to check to see if that was all right with them, to see if they wanted
access to any of these people, and to get back to me. And if they had no objections,
it would be fine with me." Clarke added,"I have no recollection of clearing it with
anybody at the White House."
Although White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card remembered someone telling him about
the Saudi request shortly after 9/11, he said he had not talked to the Saudis and
did not ask anyone to do anything about it. The President and Vice President told us
they were not aware of the issue at all until it surfaced much later in the media.
None of the officials we interviewed recalled any intervention or direction on this
matter from any political appointee.
Third, we believe that the FBI conducted a satisfactory screening of Saudi nationals
who left the United States on charter flights.
The Saudi government was advised of and agreed to the FBI's requirements that
passengers be identified and checked against various databases before the flights
departed.  The Federal Aviation Administration representative working in the FBI
operations center made sure that the FBI was aware of the flights of Saudi nationals
and was able to screen the passengers before they were allowed to depart.
The FBI interviewed all persons of interest on these flights prior to their
departures. They concluded that none of the passengers was connected to the 9/11
attacks and have since found no evidence to change that conclusion. Our own
independent review of the Saudi nationals involved confirms that no one with known
links to terrorism departed on these flights.
PLANNING FOR WAR
By late in the evening of September 11, the President had addressed the nation on the
terrible events of the day. Vice President Cheney described the President's mood as
somber.  The long day was not yet over. When the larger meeting that included his
domestic department heads broke up, President Bush chaired a smaller meeting of top
advisers, a group he would later call his "war council."  This group usually
included Vice President Cheney, Secretary of State Powell, Secretary of Defense
Donald Rumsfeld, General Hugh Shelton, Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs (later to
become chairman) General Myers, DCI Tenet, Attorney General Ashcroft, and FBI
Director Robert Mueller. From the White House staff, National Security Advisor
Condoleezza Rice and Chief of Staff Card were part of the core group, often joined
by their deputies, Stephen Hadley and Joshua Bolten.
In this restricted National Security Council meeting, the President said it was a
time for self-defense. The United States would punish not just the perpetrators of
the attacks, but also those who harbored them. Secretary Powell said the United
States had to make it clear to Pakistan, Afghanistan, and the Arab states that the
time to act was now. He said we would need to build a coalition. The President noted
that the attacks provided a great opportunity to engage Russia and China. Secretary
Rumsfeld urged the President and the principals to think broadly about who might
have harbored the attackers, including Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya, Sudan, and Iran. He
wondered aloud how much evidence the United States would need in order to deal with
these countries, pointing out that major strikes could take up to 60 days to
    assemble.
President Bush chaired two more meetings of the NSC on September 12. In the first
meeting, he stressed that the United States was at war with a new and different kind
of enemy. The President tasked principals to go beyond their pre-9/11 work and
develop a strategy to eliminate terrorists and punish those who support them. As
they worked on defining the goals and objectives of the upcoming campaign, they
considered a paper that went beyond al Qaeda to propose the "elimination of
terrorism as a threat to our way of life," an aim that would include pursuing other
international terrorist organizations in the Middle East.
Rice chaired a Principals Committee meeting on September 13 in the Situation Room to
refine how the fight against al Qaeda would be conducted. The principals agreed that
the overall message should be that anyone supporting al Qaeda would risk harm. The
United States would need to integrate diplomacy, financial measures, intelligence,
and military actions into an overarching strategy. The principals also focused on
Pakistan and what it could do to turn the Taliban against al Qaeda. They concluded
that if Pakistan decided not to help the United States, it too would be at
    risk.
The same day, Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage met with the Pakistani
ambassador to the United States, Maleeha Lodhi, and the visiting head of Pakistan's
military intelligence service, Mahmud Ahmed. Armitage said that the United States
wanted Pakistan to take seven steps:
to stop al Qaeda operatives at its border and end all logistical support for
    Bin Ladin;
to give the United States blanket overflight and landing rights for all
    necessary military and intelligence operations;
to provide territorial access to U.S. and allied military intelligence and
    other personnel to conduct operations against al Qaeda;
to provide the United States with intelligence information;
to continue to publicly condemn the terrorist acts;
to cut off all shipments of fuel to the Taliban and stop recruits from going
    to Afghanistan; and,
if the evidence implicated bin Ladin and al Qaeda and the Taliban continued to
    harbor them, to break relations with the Taliban government.
Pakistan made its decision swiftly. That afternoon, Secretary of State Powell
announced at the beginning of an NSC meeting that Pakistani President Musharraf had
agreed to every U.S. request for support in the war on terrorism. The next day, the
U.S. embassy in Islamabad confirmed that Musharraf and his top military commanders
had agreed to all seven demands." Pakistan will need full US support as it proceeds
with us," the embassy noted." Musharraf said the GOP [government of Pakistan] was
making substantial concessions in allowing use of its territory and that he would
pay a domestic price. His standing in Pakistan was certain to suffer. To
counterbalance that he needed to show that Pakistan was benefiting from his
    decisions."
At the September 13 NSC meeting, when Secretary Powell described Pakistan's reply,
President Bush led a discussion of an appropriate ultimatum to the Taliban. He also
ordered Secretary Rumsfeld to develop a military plan against the Taliban. The
President wanted the United States to strike the Taliban, step back, wait to see if
they got the message, and hit them hard if they did not. He made clear that the
military should focus on targets that would influence the Taliban's behavior.
President Bush also tasked the State Department, which on the following day delivered
to the White House a paper titled "Game Plan for a Political- Military Strategy for
Pakistan and Afghanistan." The paper took it as a given that Bin Ladin would
continue to act against the United States even while under Taliban control. It
therefore detailed specific U.S. demands for the Taliban: surrender Bin Ladin and
his chief lieutenants, including Ayman al Zawahiri; tell the United States what the
Taliban knew about al Qaeda and its operations; close all terrorist camps; free all
imprisoned foreigners; and comply with all UN Security Council resolutions.
The State Department proposed delivering an ultimatum to the Taliban: produce Bin
Ladin and his deputies and shut down al Qaeda camps within 24 to 48 hours, or the
United States will use all necessary means to destroy the terrorist infrastructure.
The State Department did not expect the Taliban to comply. Therefore, State and
Defense would plan to build an international coalition to go into Afghanistan. Both
departments would consult with NATO and other allies and request intelligence,
basing, and other support from countries, according to their capabilities and
resources. Finally, the plan detailed a public U.S. stance: America would use all
its resources to eliminate terrorism as a threat, punish those responsible for the
9/11 attacks, hold states and other actors responsible for providing sanctuary to
terrorists, work with a coalition to eliminate terrorist groups and networks, and
avoid malice toward any people, religion, or culture.
President Bush recalled that he quickly realized that the administration would have
to invade Afghanistan with ground troops.
But the early briefings to the President and Secretary Rumsfeld on military options
were disappointing.    Tommy Franks, the commanding general of Central Command
(CENTCOM), told us that the President was dissatisfied. The U.S. military, Franks
said, did not have an off-the-shelf plan to eliminate the al Qaeda threat in
Afghanistan. The existing Infinite Resolve options did not, in his view, amount to
such a plan.
All these diplomatic and military plans were reviewed over the weekend of September
15-16, as President Bush convened his war council at Camp David.
Present were Vice President Cheney, Rice, Hadley, Powell, Armitage, Rumsfeld,
Ashcroft, Mueller, Tenet, Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz, and Cofer
Black, chief of the DCI's Counterterrorist Center.
Tenet described a plan for collecting intelligence and mounting covert operations. He
proposed inserting CIA teams into Afghanistan to work with Afghan warlords who would
join the fight against al Qaeda.  These CIA teams would act jointly with the
military's Special Operations units. President Bush later praised this proposal,
saying it had been a turning point in his thinking.
General Shelton briefed the principals on the preliminary plan for Afghanistan that
the military had put together. It drew on the Infinite Resolve "phased campaign"
plan the Pentagon had begun developing in November 2000 as an addition to the strike
options it had been refining since 1998. But Shelton added a new element-the
possible significant use of ground forces- and that is where President Bush
reportedly focused his attention.
After hearing from his senior advisers, President Bush discussed with Rice the
contents of the directives he would issue to set all the plans into motion. Rice
prepared a paper that President Bush then considered with principals on Monday
morning, September 17. "The purpose of this meeting," he recalled saying,"is to
assign tasks for the first wave of the war against terrorism. It starts today."
In a written set of instructions slightly refined during the morning meeting,
President Bush charged Ashcroft, Mueller, and Tenet to develop a plan for homeland
defense. President Bush directed Secretary of State Powell to deliver an ultimatum
to the Taliban along the lines that his department had originally proposed. The
State Department was also tasked to develop a plan to stabilize Pakistan and to be
prepared to notify Russia and countries near Afghanistan when hostilities were
    imminent.
In addition, Bush and his advisers discussed new legal authorities for covert action
in Afghanistan, including the administration's first Memorandum of Notification on
Bin Ladin. Shortly thereafter, President Bush authorized broad new authorities for
the CIA.
President Bush instructed Rumsfeld and Shelton to develop further the Camp David
military plan to attack the Taliban and al Qaeda if the Taliban rejected the
ultimatum. The President also tasked Rumsfeld to ensure that robust measures to
protect American military forces against terrorist attack were implemented
worldwide. Finally, he directed Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill to craft a plan to
target al Qaeda's funding and seize its assets.
NSC staff members had begun leading meetings on terrorist fund-raising by September
    18.
Also by September 18, Powell had contacted 58 of his foreign counterparts and
received offers of general aid, search-and-rescue equipment and personnel, and
medical assistance teams.
On the same day, Deputy Secretary of State Armitage was called by Mahmud Ahmed
regarding a two-day visit to Afghanistan during which the Pakistani intelligence
chief had met with Mullah Omar and conveyed the U.S. demands. Omar's response was
"not negative on all these points." But the
administration knew that theTaliban was unlikely to turn over Bin Ladin.
The pre-9/11 draft presidential directive on al Qaeda evolved into a new directive,
National Security Presidential Directive 9, now titled "Defeating the Terrorist
Threat to the United States." The directive would now extend to a global war on
terrorism, not just on al Qaeda. It also incorporated the President's determination
not to distinguish between terrorists and those who harbor them. It included a
determination to use military force if necessary to end al Qaeda's sanctuary in
Afghanistan. The new directive-formally signed on October 25, after the fighting in
Afghanistan had already begun-included new material followed by annexes discussing
each targeted terrorist group. The old draft directive on al Qaeda became, in
effect, the first annex.
The United States would strive to eliminate all terrorist networks, dry up their
financial support, and prevent them from acquiring weapons of mass destruction. The
goal was the "elimination of terrorism as a threat to our way of life."
"PHASE TWO" AND THE QUESTION OF IRAQ
President Bush had wondered immediately after the attack whether Saddam Hussein's
regime might have had a hand in it. Iraq had been an enemy of the United States for
11 years, and was the only place in the world where the United States was engaged in
ongoing combat operations. As a former pilot, the President was struck by the
apparent sophistication of the operation and some of the piloting, especially
Hanjour's high-speed dive into the Pentagon. He told us he recalled Iraqi support
for Palestinian suicide terrorists as well. Speculating about other possible states
that could be involved, the President told us he also thought about Iran.
Clarke has written that on the evening of September 12, President Bush told him and
some of his staff to explore possible Iraqi links to 9/11. "See if Saddam did this,"
Clarke recalls the President telling them." See if he's linked in any way." While he believed the details of Clarke's account to be
incorrect, President Bush acknowledged that he might well have spoken to Clarke at
some point, asking him about Iraq.
Responding to a presidential tasking, Clarke's office sent a memo to Rice on
September 18, titled "Survey of Intelligence Information on Any Iraq Involvement in
the September 11 Attacks." Rice's chief staffer on Afghanistan, Zalmay Khalilzad,
concurred in its conclusion that only some anecdotal evidence linked Iraq to al
Qaeda. The memo found no "compelling case" that Iraq had either planned or
perpetrated the attacks. It passed along a few foreign intelligence reports,
including the Czech report alleging an April 2001 Prague meeting between Atta and an
Iraqi intelligence officer (discussed in chapter 7) and a Polish report that
personnel at the headquarters of Iraqi intelligence in Baghdad were told before
September 11 to go on the streets to gauge crowd reaction to an unspecified event.
Arguing that the case for links between Iraq and al Qaeda was weak, the memo pointed
out that Bin Ladin resented the secularism of Saddam Hussein's regime. Finally, the
memo said, there was no confirmed reporting on Saddam cooperating with Bin Ladin on
unconventional weapons.
On the afternoon of 9/11, according to contemporaneous notes, Secretary Rumsfeld
instructed General Myers to obtain quickly as much information as possible. The
notes indicate that he also told Myers that he was not simply interested in striking
empty training sites. He thought the U.S. response should consider a wide range of
options and possibilities. The secretary said his instinct was to hit Saddam Hussein
at the same time-not only Bin Ladin. Secretary Rumsfeld later explained that at the
time, he had been considering either one of them, or perhaps someone else, as the
responsible party.
According to Rice, the issue of what, if anything, to do about Iraq was really
engaged at Camp David. Briefing papers on Iraq, along with many others, were in
briefing materials for the participants. Rice told us the administration was
concerned that Iraq would take advantage of the 9/11 attacks. She recalled that in
the first Camp David session chaired by the President, Rumsfeld asked what the
administration should do about Iraq. Deputy Secretary Wolfowitz made the case for
striking Iraq during "this round" of the war on terrorism.
A Defense Department paper for the Camp David briefing book on the strategic concept
for the war on terrorism specified three priority targets for initial action: al
Qaeda, theTaliban, and Iraq. It argued that of the three, al Qaeda and Iraq posed a
strategic threat to the United States. Iraq's long-standing involvement in terrorism
was cited, along with its interest in weapons of mass destruction.
Secretary Powell recalled that Wolfowitz-not Rumsfeld-argued that Iraq was ultimately
the source of the terrorist problem and should therefore be attacked.
Powell said that Wolfowitz was not able to justify his belief that Iraq was behind
9/11. "Paul was always of the view that Iraq was a problem that had to be dealt
with," Powell told us." And he saw this as one way of using this event as a way to
deal with the Iraq problem." Powell said that President Bush did not give
Wolfowitz's argument "much weight." Though continuing to
worry about Iraq in the following week, Powell said, President Bush saw Afghanistan
as the priority.
President Bush told Bob Woodward that the decision not to invade Iraq was made at the
morning session on September 15. Iraq was not even on the table during the September
15 afternoon session, which dealt solely with Afghanistan.
Rice said that when President Bush called her on Sunday, September 16, he said the
focus would be on Afghanistan, although he still wanted plans for Iraq should the
country take some action or the administration eventually determine that it had been
involved in the 9/11 attacks.
At the September 17 NSC meeting, there was some further discussion of "phase two" of
the war on terrorism.
President Bush ordered the Defense Department to be ready to deal with Iraq if
Baghdad acted against U.S. interests, with plans to include possibly occupying Iraqi
oil fields.
Within the Pentagon, Deputy Secretary Wolfowitz continued to press the case for
dealing with Iraq. Writing to Rumsfeld on September 17 in a memo headlined
"Preventing More Events,"he argued that if there was even a 10 percent chance that
Saddam Hussein was behind the 9/11 attack, maximum priority should be placed on
eliminating that threat. Wolfowitz contended that the odds were "far more" than 1 in
10, citing Saddam's praise for the attack, his long record of involvement in
terrorism, and theories that Ramzi Yousef was an Iraqi agent and Iraq was behind the
1993 attack on the World Trade Center.    The next day, Wolfowitz renewed the
argument, writing to Rumsfeld about the interest of Yousef 's co-conspirator in the
1995 Manila air plot in crashing an explosives-laden plane into CIA headquarters,
and about information from a foreign government regarding Iraqis' involvement in the
attempted hijacking of a Gulf Air flight. Given this background, he wondered why so
little thought had been devoted to the danger of suicide pilots, seeing a "failure
of imagination" and a mind-set that dismissed possibilities.
On September 19, Rumsfeld offered several thoughts for his commanders as they worked
on their contingency plans. Though he emphasized the worldwide nature of the
conflict, the references to specific enemies or regions named only the Taliban, al
Qaeda, and Afghanistan.
Shelton told us the administration reviewed all the Pentagon's war plans and
challenged certain assumptions underlying them, as any prudent organization or
leader should do.
General Tommy Franks, the commanding general of Central Command, recalled receiving
Rumsfeld's guidance that each regional commander should assess what these plans
meant for his area of responsibility. He knew he would soon be striking the Taliban
and al Qaeda in Afghanistan. But, he told us, he now wondered how that action was
connected to what might need to be done in Somalia, Yemen, or Iraq.
On September 20, President Bush met with British Prime Minister Tony Blair, and the
two leaders discussed the global conflict ahead. When Blair asked about Iraq, the
President replied that Iraq was not the immediate problem. Some members of his
administration, he commented, had expressed a different view, but he was the one
responsible for making the decisions.
Franks told us that he was pushing independently to do more robust planning on
military responses in Iraq during the summer before 9/11-a request President Bush
denied, arguing that the time was not right. (CENTCOM also began dusting off plans
for a full invasion of Iraq during this period, Franks said.) The CENTCOM commander
told us he renewed his appeal for further military planning to respond to Iraqi
moves shortly after 9/11, both because he personally felt that Iraq and al Qaeda
might be engaged in some form of collusion and because he worried that Saddam might
take advantage of the attacks to move against his internal enemies in the northern
or southern parts of Iraq, where the United States was flying regular missions to
enforce Iraqi no-fly zones. Franks said that President Bush again turned down the
    request.
Having issued directives to guide his administration's preparations for war, on
Thursday, September 20, President Bush addressed the nation before a joint session
of Congress." Tonight," he said, "we are a country awakened to danger." The President blamed al Qaeda for 9/11 and the 1998
embassy bombings and, for the first time, declared that al Qaeda was "responsible
for bombing the USS Cole." He reiterated the ultimatum
that had already been conveyed privately." The Taliban must act, and act
immediately," he said." They will hand over the terrorists, or they will share in
their fate." The President added that America's quarrel
was not with Islam: "The enemy of America is not our many Muslim friends; it is not
our many Arab friends. Our enemy is a radical network of terrorists, and every
government that supports them." Other regimes faced hard choices, he pointed out:
"Every nation, in every region, now has a decision to make: Either you are with us,
or you are with the terrorists."
President Bush argued that the new war went beyond Bin Ladin." Our war on terror
begins with al Qaeda, but it does not end there," he said." It will not end until
every terrorist group of global reach has been found, stopped, and defeated." The
President had a message for the Pentagon:"The hour is coming when America will act,
and you will make us proud." He also had a message for those outside the United
States." This is civilization's fight," he said. "We ask every nation to join
    us."
President Bush approved military plans to attack Afghanistan in meetings with Central
Command's General Franks and other advisers on September 21 and October 2.
Originally titled "Infinite Justice," the operation's code word was changed-to avoid
the sensibilities of Muslims who associate the power of infinite justice with God
alone-to the operational name still used for operations in Afghanistan:"Enduring
    Freedom."
The plan had four phases.
In Phase One, the United States and its allies would move forces into the
    region and arrange to operate from or over neighboring countries such as
    Uzbekistan and Pakistan. This occurred in the weeks following 9/11, aided by
    overwhelming international sympathy for the United States.
In Phase Two, air strikes and Special Operations attacks would hit key al
    Qaeda and Taliban targets. In an innovative joint effort, CIA and Special
    Operations forces would be deployed to work together with each major Afghan
    faction opposed to the Taliban. The Phase Two strikes and raids began on October
    7. The basing arrangements contemplated for Phase One were substantially
    secured-after arduous effort-by the end of that month.
In Phase Three, the United States would carry out "decisive operations" using
    all elements of national power, including ground troops, to topple the Taliban
    regime and eliminate al Qaeda's sanctuary in Afghanistan. Mazar-e-Sharif, in
    northern Afghanistan, fell to a coalition assault by Afghan and U.S. forces on
    November 9. Four days later the Taliban had fled from Kabul. By early December,
    all major cities had fallen to the coalition. On December 22, Hamid Karzai, a
    Pashtun leader from Kandahar, was installed as the chairman of Afghanistan's
    interim administration. Afghanistan had been liberated from the rule of the
    Taliban.
In December 2001, Afghan forces, with limited U.S. support, engaged al Qaeda elements
in a cave complex called Tora Bora. In March 2002, the largest engagement of the war
was fought, in the mountainous Shah-i-Kot area south of Gardez, against a large
force of al Qaeda jihadists. The three-week battle was substantially successful, and
almost all remaining al Qaeda forces took refuge in Pakistan's equally mountainous
and lightly governed frontier provinces. As of July 2004, Bin Ladin and Zawahiri are
still believed to be at large.
In Phase Four, civilian and military operations turned to the indefinite task
    of what the armed forces call "security and stability operations."
Within about two months of the start of combat operations, several hundred CIA
operatives and Special Forces soldiers, backed by the striking power of U.S.
aircraft and a much larger infrastructure of intelligence and support efforts, had
combined with Afghan militias and a small number of other coalition soldiers to
destroy theTaliban regime and disrupt al Qaeda. They had killed or captured about a
quarter of the enemy's known leaders. Mohammed Atef, al Qaeda's military commander
and a principal figure in the 9/11 plot, had been killed by a U.S. air strike.
According to a senior CIA officer who helped devise the overall strategy, the CIA
provided intelligence, experience, cash, covert action capabilities, and entre to
tribal allies. In turn, the U.S. military offered combat expertise, firepower,
logistics, and communications.
With these initial victories won by the middle of 2002, the global conflict against
Islamist terrorism became a different kind of struggle.
Zoot Suit
A style of suit worn by African Americans, Filipino Americans, and Mexican Americans during the 1930s and 1940s. In Chicano culture this style of dress is primarily associated with the pachucos of the 1940s. The fashion at that time was to wear very baggy pants with pegged legs, long jackets with high and sharp shoulder pads, thick-soled shoes, and long watch chains dangling from the belt. An addition to the whole style common to Chicanos was a particular haircut, long with a ducktail and a wide-brimmed hat.
The word zoot was known within the urban jazz culture of Harlem, and it meant something either exaggerated in performance or in style. Many African Americans wore an extravagant style of clothing, the baggy pegged pants and jackets with padded shoulders, that later became known as the zoot suit. In the novel Invisible Man by Ralph Ellison, he describes the zoot--suiters style, walking slowly, their shoulders swaying, their legs swinging from their hips in trousers that ballooned upward from cuffs fitting snug about their ankles; their coats long and hip-tight with shoulders far too broad to be those of natural western men (1947, 380). In the late-night jazz scenes of Harlem this style was a killer-diller coat with a drape-shape, reat-pleats and shoulders padded like a lunatics cell (380). Tyler makes the point that the zoot suit was an extremely symbolic costume, which gave the wearer the look of a child in adult clothing. The broad square shoulders gave a macho look to the youth, and the finger-tipped coat was made for fun and leisure. The long baggy pants were made for dancing, especially the jitterbug, and the wide Panama hats were another sign of adulthood. The business of fun, dancing and dating were the key characteristics displayed by Zoot-Suiters. It was an escape from drudgery and futile labor to the bliss of free-wheeling movement in the city among youths in the new youth culture (Tyler, 23). Prominent black entertainers wore the zoot suit, such as Cab Calloway, Sammy Davis Jr., and Duke Ellington. Ellington performed at the Orpheum in Los Angeles in 1941 and 1942 with a musical called Jump for Joy in which the performers wore zoot suits, also known as Gone with the Wind suits, after the style worn by Clark Gable in the movie by the same name.
Even though the zoot suit was worn by the young men of several different races and ethnicities, it is primarily identified with the pachucos of Los Angeles. Pachucos were mostly second-generation Mexicans, the sons of migrant laborers and working-class immigrants. Pachucos created their own subculture, an arrogant style of dressing, a bilingual secret argot, and for some individuals membership in petty criminal gangs. The zoot suit became a symbolic disguise that identified the zoot-suiter as neither a Mexican nor an American. It was not a bicultural or binational position, but rather a position between cultures, a hanging in space position. The overly confident, slow swagger of the pachuco, today exemplified by the cholo, made it appear in fact as if the zoot-suiter were walking on air.
During the summer of 1943 the attention of the whole country was on Los Angeles when gangs of sailors and zoot-suiters battled with each other in the streets of the city. It is unclear if this was a race riot or a riot of patriotic sailors who attacked, beat, and stripped young Mexican Americans whom they perceived to be unpatriotic zoot-suiters. Between the third and thirteenth of June zoot-suiters were open targets. Much has been written about these riots from both literary and historical perspectives.
During the late 1970s the zoot suit received wide recognition and popularity with the production of a successful play by Luis Valdez. In 1981 a film by the same name, Zoot Suit, was produced and directed by Luis Valdez, with performances by actors Daniel Valdez and Edward James Olmos.
See also Cholos; Pachucos
References Barker 1950; Cosgrove 1989; Ellison, 1947; Mazon 1984; Orona-Cordova 1992; Sanchez 1978; Stone 1990; Tyler 1994; Valdez 1992; Zoot Suit 1981
Zozobra
A giant, forty-foot effigy in the form of a puppet, which is burned during the annual Santa Fe Fiesta held in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The word Zozobra translates to gloom or worry or anguished. The Zozobra is ritualistically burned at the beginning of the fiesta, which symbolizes the end of destructiveness, gloom, and worry, setting the tone for a successful fiesta. The creation of Zozobra was introduced into the fiesta in 1926 by Will Shuster, who felt that the fiesta had become dull and commercialized. Throughout the years the image of Zozobra changed from a simple twenty-foot puppet to the elaborate forty-foot figure with animated eyes, arms, and mouth that he is today. In 1969 Shuster turned over the responsibility and copyright of Zozobra to the Kiwanis Club of Santa Fe. He is hung on a tall pole on a hill, outside the city, where the burning can be seen by the thousands of people who come to watch. The death of gloom is supposed to resurrect happiness.
In response to the tradition of the burning of Zozobra, a group of New Mexico Chicanos started a tradition of burning El Kookoee, a figure known by many Chicanos as the bogeyman, during the Festival de Otoo.
See also El Kookoee; Santa Fe Fiesta
References Cohen 1985; Grimes 1976; Weigle and White 1988
HOWDY,
WHAT'S BEEN GOING ON AMIGO. I HAVE NOT TALKED TO YOU IN A WHILE. GIVE
YOU THE SCOPE OF WHATS BEEN GOING ON WITH ME. I LEFT OILSTATES BACK IN
MARCH WITH ANOTHER COMPANY. DID A LOT OF TRAVELING AND THEY (OILSTATES)
MADE ME A SWEET OFFER TO COME BACK. SO I AM BACK.
WHO'S GETTING MARRIED? SOUNDS LIKE THIS IS GOING TO BE A GREAT BACHELOR
PARTY. GIVE ME A CALL SOMETIME CELL: 713 991 - 5621.
ROB
Kim:
I have completed the invoices for April, May and June and we owe
    Pasadena each month for a total of $3,615,910.62. I am waiting to hear
    back from Patti on May and June to make sure they are okay with her.
    Do you want me to pay Pasadena on Friday for these months or do you
    want me to hold off until I finish July and August? 
Again, I do not have all of the information for July and August, so I
    cannot give you any numbers. If I go by what is currently in the
    system as a guide, Pasadena would owe Enron a little over $1 mil. I
    need to forecast the money today, so please let me know what you would
    like to do.
FYI-I will be out of the office all next week.
Megan
Subject: RE: City of Pasadena
Thanks you so much for working on these as fast as you have - there
    was a priority in getting them out. However, as you know, the less
    cash outlay that we have right now the better. Lets wait and try to
    offset the amount we owe them with what they owe us - so I say wait
    until you get July and August done.
What do you think the time frame is on this? 
And when would be the earliest that we would make the payment?
    Thanks, Kim
Subject: RE: City of Pasadena
Patti is the one with the details, I'm just the deal maker and don't
    have access to any of the systems. All I know is what fixed priced
    baseload deals we have. I have no idea what flows. I hope Patti can
    help you soon.
Let me know if you don't hear from her today.
Subject: RE: City of Pasadena
If I can get all of the information today, I can tell you this
    afternoon. It doesn't take long to create the calc sheets. I
    understand from Janine that you or Patti can provide me with the
    detail that I need. If necessary, I can come pick it up. I have sent
    Patti a list.
For payment, we have to forecast the money two days out. So, if I
    know today, I can pay on Friday.
Megan
Subject: RE: City of Pasadena
thats fine - we can't pay them anyway
a brief History
Prehistoric man in Asia Minor (now modern Turkey) or Greece
could look out across the Aegean toward the horizon and see the faint
silhouette of land. Their curiosity pushed them to build vessels that
were strong enough to ford the open seas and reach these islands,
marking the start of the long legacy of Mediterranean seafaring.
Around 7000 b.c. , the Phoenicians set out from what is now
Iran to explore their surroundings. They eventually reached the
islands, and founded colonies on the islands in the northernmost part
of the Aegean Sea. An important early material, obsidian, was
discovered on the island of Milos. Obsidian is a hard, vitreous
volcanic rock, which could be fashioned into tools for cutting and
stabbing. The high quality of the seam on Milos ensured that the area
remained popular with early travelers.
The basic elements of life in the Aegean began to come
together as early as 5000 b.c. , and were already in place by the late
Bronze Age (c. 2700 b.c. ). The major changes were not to daily tasks
and routines, but to the political power base, which changed regularly
and not necessarily peacefully throughout the ages.
Cycladic Culture
At around 3500 b.c. , a sophisticated culture evolved in the
Cyclades islands. The distinctive, sculpted marble figures of the era
are now being reproduced in vast quantities as souvenirs. You will find
original examples in the archaeological museums throughout the
Cyclades, although one of the earliest examples is in the museum on
Paros. The people farmed and fished; on the dawning of the Bronze Age
in 2700 b.c. , they began to work with metals. The Cycladic culture was
influenced by societies in the east, importing the pottery wheel from
Mesopotamia. They also continued to trade in obsidian and the local
marble.
The Minoans and the Myceneans
Farther south in Crete, the Minoan culture developed after
2000 b.c. into the most significant of its age, spreading its influence
throughout the region by trade and diplomacy. Santorini (Thira), the
next major island north, was heavily influenced by Crete, and the
settlements of Thira and Akrotiri thrived at this time. The magnificent
frescoes and mosaics found at Akrotiri are in Athens at present, but
the remains of the buildings at the site provide ample evidence of the
sophistication of the culture here.
Around 1500 b.c. , a massive volcanic eruption at Santorini
destroyed not only Akrotiriunder feet of ash and pumicebut the
whole Minoan civilization. Massive tidal waves swept over Crete, and
other parts of the Mediterranean, smashing buildings and drowning many
thousands of people.
In the wake of this tremendous natural upheaval, the Aegean
Islands next came under the influence of the Mycenaeans (at around 1300
b.c. ), who had a base in the Peloponnese region of the Greek mainland.
The Mycenaeans were an acquisitive race who came to conquer, not to
trade. Their extensive military campaigns were later chronicled by
Homer in his epic poems The Odyssey and The Iliad.
The Rise of Athens
The Dorians, who came overland from northern Europe,
conquered the Mycenaeans. They were a barbaric race, and their custody
of the area brought about a dark period during which the written word
was forgotten and art disappeared. They held sway over islands off the
northern Greek coast, but the Phoenicians kept control of the main sea
routes; south of the area, trade continued as usual. At the same time,
city-states began to grow in influence on the southern Greek mainland.
Athens became the most powerful, heralding the start of the classical
Greek period. However, Greece was not yet a country; each city-state
was self-governing and autonomous.
The new culture spread throughout the Mediterranean, helped
by a huge increase in migration from the mainland to new settlements
such as Carthage, a Greek city on the African coast of the
Mediterranean. Culture and the arts flourished once again. Athletic
prowess was admired and the Olympic games were constituted in 776 b.c.
, to promote friendly competition. Homer wrote his epic works on Chios;
and lyrical poetry was much admired, particularly the work of the poets
Archilochos on Paros and Sappho on Lesvos.
The preeminent islands of this era were Delos, a sacred
island and center of religion ruled by Athens; Samos, ruled by the
tyrant Polycrates; and Naxos, whose ruler Lygdamis undertook some major
building projects. Archaeology shows that, during this time, societies
lived mainly in coastal trading towns with little settlement
inland.
The Persian Wars
As Athens rose in influence and power in the West, it was
matched in the East by the rise of the Persian Empire. From a power
base in Anatolia, the Persians overran the eastern Aegean Islands and
set their sights on the Cyclades. In 490 b.c. , they captured sacred
Delos and razed the settlements on Naxos. The island communities were
undecided about which side to back for a time. Paros and Andros
contributed to the Persian armory, while others supported Athens. The
two superpowers finally clashed at the epic battles of Marathon and
Salamis in 480 b.c. The Persians were defeated, and Athens duly
punished the islands that had turned against it.
Following its victory, Athens introduced the concept of a
mutual protection alliance (a kind of NATO of the ancient world).
Several islands and Greek city-states agreed to work together, and
created a treasury to fund their plans, which was held on the island of
Delos. The alliance became known as the Delian League. Although there
were minor internal wrangles, the league controlled the Aegean and the
greater Athenian Empire for most of the fifth century b.c. Later, in
454 b.c. , the treasury was transferred to Athens and its deposits were
used to finance the construction of many of the major buildings and
temples of the Classical Age.
In 431 b.c. , Athens began a war with its neighbor and
league member Sparta. Although the islands saw little action, as the
war went on they could see that Athens was slowly losing its power.
Before the end of the war in 401 b.c. , many islands had already
transferred their allegiance to the victors, who were led by Philip II
of Macedon. He was followed in 336 b.c. by his son Alexander the Great,
one of the most remarkable leaders in history. His rise to power
ushered in the Hellenistic period.
Hellenistic and Roman Periods
When Alexander went on to conquer lands as far to the east
as India, the Aegean became a crossroads for the long trading routes.
Delos became one of the largest marketplaces in the empire. Following
Alexanders death, his lands were divided among his generals. Much of
the Aegean came under the rule of the Ptolemies, along with Egypt.
Cleopatra was a member of this famous ruling clan.
Although in 88 b.c. , Mithradates made a swift and
successful raid from the East across Asia Minor and the Aegean Islands,
the next major power change brought influence from the West. The Greek
Hellenistic Empire was gradually, and peacefully, absorbed into the
Roman Empire.
The Byzantine Empire and the Coming of Christianity
The Romans ruled a pagan empire, but the Aegean had an
important influence on the early development of Christianity. In a.d. 
95, St. John arrived on Patmos, a small rocky island in the Dodecanese,
as a political prisoner. It was here that he wrote what was to become
the final book of the New Testament, the Book of Revelation. It wasnt
until a.d. 330, however, when the newly converted Emperor Constantine
made Byzantium, renamed Constantinople, capital of his Eastern Empire
that Christianity was assured of its dominant role in future Greek
life.
The Byzantine Empire had powerful and well-fortified
cities, but the countryside and the outlying islands were ravaged by
waves of invaders. In an attempt to counter a threat from the Saracen
Muslims, a new potent religious force from the East, the Byzantine army
forcefully enlisted the men of the islands. Disease took a further
toll. By the time of the Crusades, many of the Aegean islands had been
practically depopulated.
As the Byzantine Empire weakened at the end of the first
millennium, Crusader forces were sent from Western Europe to counter
the Muslim forces and retake Jerusalem for the Christian faith.
Unfortunately, their zeal was not matched by their discrimination. The
crusaders swept through the l;and of Byzantium slaughtering Christians
as well as Muslims, civilians as well as soldiers. Constantinople was
taken by Crusader forces in 1204, and they stripped the city of manyof
its finest treasureswhich now grace the public buildings of
Venicealthough a large consignment of books and manuscripts was
transferred to the monastery at Patmos before the city fell.
While Byzantine land was being divided, there was no one in
control of the seas, so pirates raided towns on many of the islands. To
counter this, the populations moved from their homes on the coast and
built settlements inland, out of sight of the raiding parties. This
created a pattern seen today throughout the Aegean of a small port
(skala) which serves an inland settlement or chora, making it easier to
protect the island from attack.
The minor Aegean Islands were taken by various powerful
European noblemen, many of whom were Genoese or Venetian, such as Marco
Sanudo on Naxos. The noblemen had free rein to create their own
fiefdoms. The Venetians fortified their main townsNaxos Town and
Antiparos Town are wonderful examples of thiscreating labyrinths of
narrow alleys and cul-de-sacs that were designed to confuse and to
demoralize invaders. The Genoese took control of the eastern Aegean
Islands, which were considered the most valuable for agriculture and
trade.
After a final bloody defeat by the Muslims in 1309,
Christian forces were forced from the Holy Land. The Knights of St.
John, a holy military force, made their way to Rhodes and Kos in the
Dodecanese. They began the process of building their strong citadels,
and reinforcing the Christian faith on the islands. However, they had
not seen the last of their Muslim foe. A force was gaining strength in
the east to threaten their new bases.
The Coming of the Ottoman Turks
The Ottomans were roving invaders who came from the east,
taking land in what is now Turkey. By the end of the 13th century, they
began their first raids on the Aegean Islands. In 1453, they took
Constantinople, and immediately made it their capital, renaming it
Istanbul.
They then set their sights on the islands of the Knights of
St. John and, after an unsuccessful siege in 1480, they finally ejected
the knights from the Dodecanese in 1522. In 1566, they wrested Chios
from the Genoese, bolstering their hold on the eastern Aegean Islands,
but the Cyclades remained in Venetian hands for another generation or
moreTinos was the last to fall in 1715. The Ottomans brought new
influences to the islands that they controlled, forming a large empire
that stretched around the eastern Mediterranean.
Toward Greek Independence
However, a movement was growing on the Greek peninsula
against Ottoman rule and for an independent Greek state. In 1770,
Russia came to aid the Greeks (defined by their Orthodox religion
rather than by historical geographical boundaries), declaring war on
the Ottoman Empire and occupying several Aegean islands until 1774.
Graffiti written by Russian soldiers can be seen in the caves of
Antiparos.
Although this attempt was unsuccessful, the campaign for a
Greek state continued into the 19th century and began to grow in
strength. The Aegean Islands played their part. Lesvos, Chios, and
Samos lay in the important shipping lanes, and patriots began
disrupting Ottoman cargo traffic. In return, the Turks violently put
down every insurrection, including the massacre on Chios, when 22,000
people were slaughtered.
The Ottoman Empire was weakening, however, and in 1821, the
peoples of the Greek mainland achieved nationhood for the first time.
The Cyclades and the Sporades island chains were also included in this
new state. A new sense of identity enveloped Greek peoples throughout
the Aegean, thus commencing a movement to expand Greece and unify the
disparate Orthodox populations.
The Twentieth Century
A series of disastrous decisions at the beginning of the
20th century began to sound a death knell for the Ottoman Empire. The
Turks lost a short war with Italy, and were forced to relinquish the
Dodecanese islands to the Italians. Greece took this opportunity to
absorb the islands of the northern and eastern Aegean and to add
Macedonia to its mainland territories.
Following this debacle, the Ottomans then allied themselves
to Germany in the World War I, losing more territory with the defeat of
the Germans in that war. Greece was handed a strip of land along the
western coast of Asia Minor, which for over 2,000 years had had a
substantial Greek population. Greece moved in to administer the land,
but a new influence upset any grand dreams of making this region a part
of greater Greece.
In 1923, Turkey broke away from the tired Ottoman rulers,
and Kemal Ataturk rose to power on a wave of popular support. He
promised a modern state for his people, but as the situation became
volatile, civil strife broke out in Turkish cities, and those
considered Greek were victims of threats and violence. Many had to
leave their birthplaces, fleeing to Lesvos, Chios, and Samos, the
Greek-ruled islands just offshore. Thousands of people arrived with
little more than the clothes they wore, putting great strain on the
resources of the islands. Finally, Greece was ousted from its new
territory in Asia Minor, which became part of the new Turkish
state.
Greece attempted to stay out of World War II, but Mussolini
saw Greece as an ideal addition to his Italian empire. His forces made
a series of attacks from their bases in the Dodecanese islands,
including sinking a Greek naval vessel in the harbor of Tinos Town, but
they only succeeded in strengthening the resolve of the population
against them. Later the Germans came in force and occupied many of the
islands.
After the war, in 1949, the Dodecanese islands finally
became part of the Greek nation. But the country was politically
fragmented, with arguments between monarchists and republicans, right
and left, and tension escalated into civil war. The struggle bypassed
most of the islands, although there was fierce fighting on Samos. Even
after the fighting stopped more than a decade later, the country was
not stable.
At the same time, the massive growth in air and road
transport saw shipping decline in importance. The Aegean Islands, which
for centuries had been important ports on the trading routes, became
the backwaters of this new transport network and the economies of
several islands came close to collapse.
In 1967, the military took the reins of power in Athens,
and until 1974, the Colonels held sway with a repressive and brutal
regime. Many Greek islanders chose to leave rather than live in poverty
and terror, and many made new homes in the United States and Australia.
The expansion of air travel began the age of mass tourism, and Greece
along with the Aegean Islands became exciting destinations for northern
Europeans escaping their damp, cool summers.
In 1982, Greece joined the European Common Market (now the
European Union). Since this time, membership has been of great monetary
benefit to the country. The EU has given large subsidies to develop
Greeces infrastructure and grants to excavate and protect its ancient
monuments.
Airfields have been constructed on a number of the islands,
and road systems have been expanded and im proved. Private investment
has even made an increasingly modern ferry fleet possible.
Politically, the 1990s have been relatively quite times for
the islands, although the divorce of Greek prime minister Andreas
Papandreou and his subsequent marriage to a much younger woman caused
consternation within conservative Greek society.
As the Balkans flared to war once again, Greek nationalism
has stirred, and there have been discussions in the kafeneion about the
land of Macedonia returning to the fold of its forefathers. Whether
this will ever happen remains to be seen, but perhaps the aid offered
by Greece to Turkey after 1999s devastating earthquake is a sign that
the animosity between these two traditional enemies is beginning to
diminish.
A Brief History
Jerusalems recorded history begins with its mention in
Egyptian court records 4,000 years ago, but there had been human
settlements here for centuries, probably millennia, before that. At the
beginning of the second millennium b.c. , Jerusalem was a Canaanite
mountain stronghold on a secondary trade route, far less important than
biblical cities such as Hazor, Megiddo, Beth Shean, and Shechem. The
earliest name associated with the city, Ur usalim, perhaps meant city
of Shalim or founded by Shalim.  Scholars speculate that Shalim
might have been an ancient Semitic deity of peace, for the name
resembles the modern Hebrew and Arabic words for peace: shalom and
salaam, respectively. If true, this is an ironic name for a city that
would become one of the most constantly and bitterly embattled places
on the face of the earth.
Biblical Jerusalem
In the Bible, Genesis 14:1820 records that Abraham visited
the city of Salem in approximately 1800 b.c. and was blessed by the
citys ruler, Melchzedik, who offered him bread and wine. The city is
not mentioned again in the Bible until the time of the great poet
warrior, King David, who captured the city from the Jebusites in about
1000 b.c. The Bible describes how Davids soldiers conquered Jerusalem
by discovering a water tunnel under the walls and using it to take the
city by surprise. Warrens Shaft, part of a Canaanite water system
discovered by 19th-century archaeologists and open to visitors, might
be the very tunnel infiltrated by Davids army.
Perhaps because Jerusalem was in neutral territory not
allotted to any of the twelve rival tribes of Israel, David made it the
capital of his newly formed kingdom and brought the most talented
artisans, dedicated priests, magical poets and musicians, and the most
formidable soldiers from each of the tribes to live in his city. He
also brought the Ark of the Covenant, the portable tabernacle
containing the Tablets of the Law received on Mount Sinai, to the
Spring of Gihon, just outside the walls of Jerusalem. There the Ark
rested until it was placed in the Temple, built in approximately 960
b.c. on Mt. Moriah, the high point at the northern end of the city.
The Temple (today known as the First Temple) was completed
by Davids son and successor, King Solomon. According to biblical
tradition, although David bought the land for the Temple and carefully
assembled its building materials, he was deemed unworthy of
constructing the Temple because he was a man of war with blood on his
hands. At the Temples dedication, Solomon addressed his God: ... the
Heavens, even the Heaven of the Heavens, cannot contain Thee; how much
less this House that I have built? 
The site of the Temple eventually became identified as Mt.
Moriah, on which it stood, where Abraham was called to sacrifice his
son Isaac. Along with this splendid house of worship, Solomon built a
royal palace, mansions for his wives, temples for the foreign gods
worshipped by the princesses he had married, and towers for the defense
of the capital. Under the wise reign of Solomon, the city flourished as
the capital of an empire that stretched from Damascus to the Red Sea
and controlled the trade routes from Egypt to Phoenicia. The Temple and
royal palace were adorned with gold and ivory from Africa and with
cedar from Lebanon; the beauties and glories of Jerusalem under Solomon
have captivated readers of the Bible for almost 3,000 years. But with
his death the empire collapsed, and the Israelite kingdom was divided
into two separate, impoverished, often warring nations: Israel, with
its capital at Shechem in the north, ruled by a series of northern
dynasties; and the smaller kingdom of Judah, with its capital at
Jerusalem, from which the Davidic dynasty continued to rule. The Bible
tells us that the cruelty and impiety of the rulers of both kingdoms
aroused the fury of the great Prophets.
In 701 b.c. the Assyrian armies of Sennacherib destroyed
Israel and moved southward to besiege Jerusalem. Thanks to King
Hezekiahs hidden water tunnel, the city narrowly escaped destruction.
The end of Davids dynasty came in 587 b.c. , when Nebuchadnezzar, King
of Babylon, invaded Judah to lay siege to Jerusalem. When it fell, the
Temple and all the buildings were burned. The people of the
once-glorious city were forced into an exile known as the Babylonian
Captivity. 
In time, the kingdom of Babylon was overthrown and the
Israelites were permitted to return to Jerusalem in 539 b.c. The city
was now under the more tolerant rule of the Persians, but rebuilding
was slow work. The Second Temple was finished in 515 b.c. , but much of
the city still lay in ruins.
Jerusalem submitted peaceably to the rule of the Greeks in
332 b.c. under Alexander the Great and, subsequently, to his
Hellenistic successors as well as the Egyptian Ptolomeys and the Syrian
Seleucids. When Seleucid rulers outlawed Judaism, Jews led by Judah
Maccabee and his brothers staged a revolution in 167 b.c. and, against
all odds, restored the primacy of Jewish religious life in Jerusalem.
The Macabbees cleansed the Temple of Hellenistic idols and the blood of
pagan sacrifices; the eight-day celebration of Hanukkah (Feast of
Dedication) commemorates their victory. The Hasmonean dynasty,
descendants of the Maccabee family, ruled an independent Jewish
Commonwealth that stretched from the Negev to the Galilee. Jerusalem
grew, surrounded with a formidable wall and defended by towers beside
the Jaffa Gate. The Hasmoneans ruled until Pompeys Roman legions
arrived in 63 b.c.
Roman Jerusalem
After the initial years of Roman administration and
political infighting, Rome installed Herod (scion of a family from
Idumea, a Jewish kingdom in the desert) as King of Judea. He reigned
from 37 to 4 b.c. , during which time he fortified the Hasmonean wall
and rebuilt the defense towers beside Jaffa Gate, the foundation of
which still stand. Several palaces were built and a water system
installed. Herod also completely rebuilt the Temple, making it one of
the most important religious centers in the Roman Empire. The courtyard
around the Temple was expanded to accommodate hundreds of thousands of
pilgrims, and the Temple Mount was shored up by retaining walls made
with great stone blocks. One of these walls, the Western Wall, is today
a major reminder of Jerusalems greatness under Herod. A massive
fortress was built overlooking the Temple Mount, which Herod named
Antonia in honor of his Roman friend and benefactor, Mark Antony.
For all his accomplishments, Herod was nevertheless hated
by his subjects; he taxed, he tortured, and he ordered the massacre of
male Jewish infants in an attempt to do away with the heralded Messiah.
When Jesus was born in about 4 b.c. , Joseph and Mary escaped Herods
paranoia by fleeing into Egypt with the new-born infant. They returned
to live in the Galilee village of Nazareth, making pilgrimages to
Jerusalem.
According to biblical accounts, Jesus spent his life
ministering in the Galilee Valley. In about a.d. 30 he and his
followers went for Passover to Jerusalem, which was in unrest at this
time, dissatisfied with Roman domination. Jesuss entry into the Temple
caused a commotion; after the Passover dinner he was arrested by the
temple priests, who were under direct Roman rule. Jesus was put on
trial quickly and condemned to crucifixion, a Roman form of execution
for political and religious dissidents as well as for common criminals.
In a province rife with rebellion and retaliation, the execution in
Jerusalem of yet another religious leader from the Galilee did not by
itself have an immediate effect on history.
After Jesuss crucifixion, harsh Roman rule continued until
a.d. 66, when the Jews rebelled. For four years Jewish zealots fought
against the might of Rome. At the end, the Roman general Titus laid
siege to Jerusalem in a.d. 70, finally attacking its starved and
weakened defenders. Those who didnt escape were executed or sold into
slavery. The Holy City and the Temple were destroyed. The last of the
zealots held out for another three years at Masada (see page 76). Half
a million civilians died in the Galilee and Judea as a result of this
first revolt against Rome, a number unequaled in ancient warfare.
Christian and Islamic Jerusalem
For 60 years Jerusalem lay in ruins, until the Roman
Emperor Hadrian ordered the city rebuilt as a Roman town dedicated to
Jupiter. In outrage, the Jews began a second revolt against Rome, led
by Simon bar Kochba. The ruins of Jerusalem were briefly liberated,
but, in the end, Jewish resistance to Rome was defeated with great loss
of life. The planned new Roman city, Aelia Capitolina, was built over
the ruins of Herodian Jerusalem, and Jews were barred from residing
there for all time. Jerusalems physical existence as a spiritual city
seemed finished, but its spiritual power for Jews, and for the
struggling new Christian religion, remained. For the next two centuries
Aelia Capitolina enjoyed an innocuous history.
But the Roman Empire became Christian in the fourth
century, and Jerusalem became a center of religion once again. Queen
Helena, a devout Christian and the mother of Emperor Constantine the
Great, made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in 326 to identify the sites
associated with Jesuss life. She found that the citys most beautiful
Roman temple, dedicated to the goddess Aphrodite, stood on the site of
the crucifixion. The temple was demolished and a vast, Classical-style
church was built around Golgotha (the hill where Jesuss crucifixion
was believed to have taken place). Throughout Jerusalem, other spots
important to Jesuss life were commemorated with religious structures.
Pilgrims came from all over the Roman (and, later, Byzantine) Empire
during the following centuries, but the prosperity they brought lasted
only until 614, when Persian armies overtook Judea and reduced
Jerusalem to rubble again. In 629, Jerusalem was recaptured by the
Byzantines.
Still reeling from the effects of the Persian devastation,
Jerusalem was conquered in 638 by the forces of Islam. The Temple Mount
was identified in Islamic tradition as the farthest spot (in Arabic,
el-aksa), the site to which the Prophet Muhammad was transported in one
night from Mecca on a winged horse, as described in the 17th chapter of
the Koran. From here the Prophet ascended to the heavens and was
permitted to glimpse paradise. The rock on the Temple Mount from which
he ascended, at or close to the site of the ruined Temple, was
commemorated by the construction of the Dome of the Rock in 691. The
Dome of the Rock remains Jerusalems most striking monument; it is
counted among the most beautiful buildings ever created. By about 715,
the El-Aksa Mosque, third holiest place of prayer in Islam (after Mecca
and Medina), had been built on the southern side of the Temple Mount.
Jerusalem continued under Islamic rule for the next four and a half
centuries. In 1099, under their leaders Godfrey de Bouillon and
Tancred, the Crusaders captured the Holy City for Christendom by
slaughtering both Muslims and Jews.
Crusaders, Mamelukes, and Turks
The Crusaders established a feudal Christian state with
Godfrey at its head. They built many impressive churches during the
term of the first Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, but in 1187 they were
driven out by Muslim forces under the great warrior Saladin. During the
Sixth Crusade (1228 1229), the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II managed
to secure Jerusalem for the Christians by negotiation.
The Christians, however, could not hold the city. After
they lost Jerusalem, a Mongol invasion swept through, and in 1244 the
Mameluke dynasty of Egypt took control, ruling Jerusalem for the next
250 years. The city struggled to rebuild from Crusader wars and
invasions. Much of the best Islamic architecture in the city was
constructed in the Mameluke era, but the past thousand years had taken
their toll: Jerusalem was unable to regain the prosperity it had
enjoyed in earlier times.
In the early 16th century, the Ottoman Turkish Empire was
advancing through the Middle East. Jerusalem fell to the Ottomans in
1517, remaining under their control for 400 years. Suleiman the
Magnificent rebuilt the walls and gates in the form they retain to this
day. Fountains, inns, religious schools, and barracks were constructed.
But when Suleiman died, his empire, including Jerusalem, began a long
period of decline. The Holy City remained a backwater until the 19th
century, when renewed interest among Christian pilgrims made it the
destination of thousands of travelers each year.
19th-Century Aspirations
At the same time, many Jews sought religious freedom and
fulfillment by moving to Palestine (as the Holy Land was traditionally
called) and especially to Jerusalem. In the 1890s, Theodor Herzl
(18601904) worked to organize a movement, Zionism, to create a Jewish
state. Chaim Weizmann (18741952), a scientist born in Russia but later
a British subject, did much to put Herzls hopes into practice.
Weizmann was an important figure in the negotiations with the British
government that led to the Balfour Declaration of 1917, supporting the
idea of a Jewish national home in Palestine that also respected the
rights of existing non-Jewish people already living there. The problem
was that British strategists, who were fighting the Ottoman Turks in
1917, had secretly promised the lands to their World War I Arab
allies.
In 1922 the League of Nations granted the British a mandate
to administer Palestine. Jerusalem flourished during the early years of
the Mandate. Modern neighborhoods, hospitals, schools, and the Hebrew
University were built in West Jerusalem, the new Jewish enclave. But
Arab opposition to new Jewish immigration and construction in Palestine
led to increasing strife; by 1946, Jerusalem was an armed camp. In 1947
the United Nations voted for the partition of Palestine into two
states, one Jewish and one Arab, with Jerusalem as an international
city that belonged to neither. But lacking the means to enforce its
decision, the United Nations was powerless to halt the fighting that
erupted as the British withdrew their troops in 1948.
Modern Israel
The State of Israel was declared during this difficult
time. In response, member states of the Arab League sent troops to help
the Palestinian Arabs. West Jerusalem, separated from the rest of the
new Jewish nation, held out under siege for several months until
Israeli forces secured a land corridor connecting the city to the
coastal areas. Jews were evacuated from the Old Citys Jewish Quarter,
and thousands of Arab families fled their homes in West Jerusalem. As a
result of armistice agreements in 1949, Jerusalem was divided: West
Jerusalem was to be under Israeli control, and East Jerusalem
(including the Old City, with its Jewish, Muslim, Christian, and
Armenian quarters) came under Jordanian authority. Free access to holy
sites for members of all religions was guaranteed by the armistice
agreements. However, with the city partitioned by fortifications and
barbed wire, no Israeli or Jewish pilgrims were allowed to visit the
Western Wall or other Jewish sites in East Jerusalem.
For the next 19 years, Jerusalem was two cities. Political
and religious boundaries were aggravated by occasional incidents of
terrorism or sniping until the Six Day War in June 1967. Within three
days the city was completely in Israeli hands, and in two weeks it was
physically and administratively reunited. Jerusalems mayor, Teddy
Kollek, spent the next 25 years orchestrating a vast program of
development, adding new cultural institutions and parks and instituting
neighborhood restoration projects while tirelessly me diating the
concerns of Jerusalems many communities.
Today, as always, Jerusalem is a city of controversies:
religious Jews in conflict with secular Jews; Palestinians calling for
independence; many residents protesting a wave of high-rise development
that many claim will turn the Holy City into a holy megalopolis. But
the ideas and mystique that have always made this an extraordinarily
special place rise above the ebbing and flowing concerns of present-day
Jerusalem as it continues to tug at the worlds attention into the new
millennium.
Tara stood stock-still, waiting for the first tiny gleam from the scout craft to
appear in the darkness of the wormhole. The gentle constant breeze of recycled
air from the vent above blew an annoying hair against her nose, but she ignored
it.
A gasp from the psychic broke her silent vigil, and she turned.
"Results, Harmon?" she suppressed the surge of annoyance that ran through her as
she contemplated the psi's gift of getting all the hot news first.
Harmon's face slowly animated - joy sweeping in to replace stern concentration.
"Tarrin says the planet's a freaking gemstone! Thriving with life, large and
small forms, no buildings of any kind, hydrocarbons, metals, and a stable
atmosphere. He's not even bringing them back through for a face to face
briefing. He says we should come through now, immediately, before the probe is
reported late."
"Harmon, tell that good for nothing son of a beta to get his hindquarters
through the gate and back here NOW, or I'll open fire on him when we come back
through." Tara fumed. Of all the impertinence! Tarrin, no doubt with orders from
Mason, was questioning her command decisions. That's what I get for not using
mercenaries.
She returned to her watch, regarding her own reflection in the long window.
Mahogany-black curly hair, cut short in the typical military style framed a
careworn, dark-skinned face. It was not an attractive face right now; her ebony
eyes shadowed by hours on the watch, full lips pursed with frustration. She had
the look of every leader she had ever known. At six foot two, she stood a full
head taller than even her Arrallin first officer. Her glowering expression
completed the imposing effect. She picked imaginary flecks off her stark gray
jumpsuit, and snorted. You look like hell, Tar. Don't blow this. Don't let
fatigue get to you.
She used the discretion of the mirrored window to secretively survey her crew.
Harmon was an excellent addition to the bridge team, but was she open minded
enough to defy United Earth Command and sever all ties from Earth? She watched
the psi bob her head, unaware of the rest of the bridge, shaking blonde curls as
she chattered away with the approaching psi relay on Mason's ship. She seemed so
depthless - self conscious and shallow on the outside, but having that
incredible gift. There had to be more to her.
Well, if she didn't pan out, she'd be terminated. Any crew member that would
jeopardize the project was meat. It would be a shame to lose that talent,
though.
Rakal, her first officer, was staring pensively at his panel. He was what this
was all about. She watched his graceful fingers ending in thick black claws tap
out calculations on the panel. His pointed ears swiveled back and forth,
catching every sound from the bridge, while his long tail swished to the rhythm
of his thoughts. Only those of the Arrallin Insurrection inner team knew he was
no common 'beta furry'. His silken fur, which would be tawny golden and striped
with jet black bands, was dyed perfectly to a pure black, and his mane trimmed
and thinned as to be indistinguishable from the rest of his coat. His eyes had
been treated and darkened to a rich purple to disguise the brilliant golden
yellow color that would mark him as an Alpha Arrallin, and leader of his hive.
Right now, he looked like an overgrown wolf who'd learned touch-typing.
The scout ship re-emerged from the hole - a brilliant speck emerging from a
sphere of velvety blackness. It's hail crackled across the comm, and Tara spun
to retake her seat at the helm. "Launch the second probe. Won't Central be
crushed to learn that another gateway has yielded little more than a class F
planet and a white dwarf system. Level 1 and 2 staffers should prepare to be
briefed and move out. This sounds like it's the one." The distinctive whuffle of
pleasure rippled through the betas on the bridge, and Rakal let loose a small
growl, as if to caution his charges against false hope. They'd scouted
twenty-seven gates so far, and none had turned up anything worth the
Insurrection's time. Tara would not let giddy hopes drag them onto a rock that
would spell the end for the project, and the Arrallin species.
There is a much-quoted saying, attributed to the epidemiologist Geoffrey Rose: A large
number of people exposed to a small risk may generate many more cases than a small number
exposed to a very high risk. This is true for many individual risk factors such as salt
intake (linked to high blood pressure and cardiovascular disease) and speeding on the
highway (linked to injuries and accidents). Does it apply to many other global health
risks? The study by Anthony Rodgers and colleagues suggests that it does.
To develop effective health policies, one must understand the existing health risks and
disease burdens. On a worldwide scale, this is a tough challenge. The Global Burden of
Disease Database, maintained by the World Health Organization (WHO), collects data from
countries around the world on risk factors such as tobacco, malnutrition, childhood abuse,
unsafe sex, childbirth, and cholesterol levels, as well as on disease burdens, for example
depression, blindness, and diarrhea. A large group of scientists from all over the world
has developed a framework to analyze these data. To compare different risks or burdens,
they calculate disability-adjusted life-years, or DALYsthe number of healthy life years
lost because of a particular disease or risk factor.
Rodgers and colleagues used data from the WHO database for 26 risk factors and from 14
epidemiological subregions of the world to calculate the proportion of
risk-factor-attributable disease burden in different population subgroups defined by age,
sex, and exposure level. For being underweight in childhood, for examplethe leading risk
factor for global loss of healthy lifethey found that only 35% of the disease burden
occurred in severely underweight children, the rest occurred in those only moderately
underweight. The relative risks for the moderately underweight are much lower, but the
number of children in that category is so large that the total attributable burden amounted
to almost two-thirds of the total global burden of disease for that risk factor.
The analysis confirmsand extends to a global levelprevious research showing that many
major health risks are important across the range of exposure levels, not just among
individuals exposed to high levels of risk. It also points to risk factors that are
particularly prevalent among specific populations and age groups, and for which highly
targeted interventions could be effective.
Despite numerous caveats and limitations of studies like this one, such analyses are
essential aids in guiding the distribution of limited funds to lower the burden of life
years lost to premature death and disability.
Red Pants
While writers whose business it is to be witty
often fail to produce, grave authors occasionally
are mirthful when laughter is farthest from their
minds.  From a lifetime of undisciplined reading with
innocent pencil in hand and malice prepense in mind,
I have gleaned a harvest of what I am pleased to denominate
Red Pants items, a sampling of which follows.
My designation derives from a splash of vivid
writing in Francis Thompson's  A Corymbus for Autumn
in which he proclaims how day's dying dragon
was
Panting red pants into the West.
In this trousers category, Thompson must share the
limelight with Coleridge by virtue of the line in Kubla
Khan :
As if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing.
Even Shelley may stake a claim, if only in the pajama
division of this sector, thanks to his description in
Epipsychidion of how
... the slow, silent night
Is measured by the pants of their calm sleep.
Since everthing is to be found in Shakespeare, it is not
surprising that on at least two occasions the Board has
contributed his own Red Pants nuggets.  In Antony and
Cleopatra (Act IV, Scene VIII, lines 14 et seq .)  Antony
commands the wounded Scarus to
... leap thou, attire and all,
Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing.
And in Othello (Act II, Scene I, line 80) Cassio utters
the fervent prayer that Othello might
Make love's quick pants in Desdemona's arms.
A variation on this theme occurs in Alba de Cspedes'
The Secret (translated from the Italian by Isabel
Quigly: Simon and Schuster, New York, 1958, page
114) where she confides that I still had a whole afternoon
before me to spend, and I used it to tidy up my
drawers....  One may well wonder what Miss Stowe
had in mind when, in Uncle Tom's Cabin (Chapter 5),
she narrates how Mrs. Shelby stood like one stricken.
Finally, turning to her toilet, she rested her face in her
hands, and gave a sort of groan.  In this same vein, the
mirthless Milton adds his bit to the general hilarity of
nations when, in describing Mount Etna in Book I of
Paradise Lost (lines 236-7) he penned
And leave a singed bottom all involved
With stench and smoke: ...
And in Chapter VI of Vanity Fair , when Blenkinsop,
the housekeeper, sought to console Amelia for Joe
Sedley's jilting of her dear Rebecca, Thackeray confides
(indelicately?)  that Amelia wept confidentially on
the housekeeper's shoulder and relieved herself a good
deal.
Chuckles often emanate from the British employment
of a term in a sense at variance with American
usage.  There is that oft-quoted example, near the
opening of Trial by Jury , where Defendant asks, Is
this the Court of the Exchequer? and having been
assured that it was, Defendant (aside) commands himself
to Be firm, be firm, my pecker.  The British, of
course, do not giggle at this bit of Gilbertian dialogue,
since to them pecker means `courage,' as in the phrase
to keep your pecker up.  Two of the more common
examples of British-American divergence of usage are
screw and knock up .  In Vanity Fair (Chapter 39), the
niggardly Sir Pitt was not nearly the aerial acrobat
your American sophomore might fancy him to be
when he screwed his tenants by letter.  He was simply
making extortionate exactions upon his wretched lessees.
Similarly, when in Chapter XXXIV of the same
novel, Mrs. Bute reminds her husband that You'd have
been screwed in goal, Bute, if I had not kept your
money, she was not speaking of pleasures deferred.  In
Bleak House (Chapter XXVII) Grandfather
Smallweed, referring to Mr. George, warns Mr.
Tulkinghorn that I have him periodically in a vice.  I'll
twist him, sir.  I'll screw him, sir.  In Kipling's The
Light That Failed (Chapter XIII), Torpenhow urges
Dick to attend a party that night, We shall be half
screwed before the morning, is his dismal sales pitch
to Dick.
In Chapter VI of Vanity Fair , Thackeray reports
on Joe Sedley's drunken avowal to wed Becky Sharp the
next morning, even if he had to knock up the Archbishop
of Canterbury at Lambeth, in order to have
him in readiness to perform the ceremony.  In Great
Expectations (Chapter VI), we learn how ... Mr.
Whopsle, being knocked up, was in such a very bad
temper.  And who could blame him?
Many a raucous snigger has been sniggered from
the pure-minded use of a word that suggests unmentionable
parts of the human body.  It does not take a
too-wicked mind to read into such terms meanings of a
lewd nature.  Who can, for instance, blame a youth
with but a mildly evil disposition from guffawing
when he reads in Pater's Marius The Epicurean (Chapter
V) a reference to Apuleius' The Golden Ass noting
that all through the book, there is an unmistakably
real feeling for asses ...?  In Scott's The Bride of
Lammermoor (Chapter VII), one reads about a boy
cudgelling an ass, and one goes back over the passage
to reassure himself that it does not contain a typographical
error for cuddling.
One may be indulged a giggle even though he is
sure that Isak Dinesen did not intend an impropriety
when she recorded in Out of Africa (Part V, Chapter
4) how Fathima's big white cock came strutting up
before me.  And one is certain that Kenneth Rexroth,
in his American Poetry in the Twentieth Century
(Herder and Herder, N.Y., 1971) did not intend to hint
at closet biographical matter when, in Chapter I, he
wrote that Whitman's poems are full of men doing
things together, or, later in the same chapter, when he
referred to Whitman's joyous workmen swinging their
tools in the open air.  College freshman still read with
flendish glee the first line in Canto I of Spenser's The
Faerie Queene (and never mind the title!) that tells
how
A Gentle Knight was pricking on the plaine.
In his poem Mr Nixon (from Hugh Selwyn Mauberley ),
Ezra Pound's Mr. Nixon advises kindly
Don't kick against the pricks,
although the identities of the latter are not divulged.
One is entitled to speculate on what outrageous
proposal the narrator had made in Proust's Remembrance
of Things Past, Vol. 2Cities of the Plain
(translated by C. K. Scott MoncrieffModern Library,
N.Y., 1934, Page 90) to cause the Duchess to say,
Apart from your balls, can't I be of any use to you?
There is a famous letter penned by Rupert Brooke to
his friend, Edward Marsh, from somewhere near Fiji
(p. 463 of A Treasury of the World's Great Letters ,
Simon and Schuster, N.Y., 1940) in which he relates
how he sends his native boy up a palm tree, where he
cuts off a couple of vast nuts ... (macho victim not
disclosed).  In the first chapter of Uncle Tom's Cabin ,
Miss Stowe offers a dialogue between Haley and Mr.
Shelby, part of which goes,  `Well,' said Haley, after
they had both silently picked their nuts for a season,
`what do you say?'   In Bleak House (Chapter XXIV)
Dickens may cause some readers to blush when he
wrote of Mr. George's blush that He reddened a little
through his brown.
We must move ineluctably to a consideration of
perfectly reputable words which, having acquired sexual
connotations, cause adolescentand often adult
hilarity, even when read by a person of only mildly
prurient mind.  In Forster's A Passage to India (Chapter
XXXI) a vivid picture is created by the sentence
Tangles like this still interrupted their intercourse.
Pages later (Chapter XXXVII), it is acknowledged that
He, too, felt that this was their last free intercourse.
Apparently from then on, it was going to have to be
cash or credit card only.  In The Bride of Lammermoor
(Chapter V), we are informed that the heroine placed
certain restrictions on their intercourse, a limitation
that might have been more usefully set in that same
author's Rob Roy (Chapter VII) where we are told of
the chance that the narrator and Miss Vernon might be
thrown into very close and frequent intercourse.
A variation of this theme is found in Robert
Browning's The Flight of the Duchess (Section V):
Not he!  For in Paris they told the elf
Our rough North land was the Land of Lays,
even though it is generally acknowledged that Paris is
nmero uno in this area of human activity.
More picturesque are the references to erections.
An arresting one occurs in A Passage to India (Chapter
XXI) in which Forster describes a small building as a
flimsy and frivolous erection, while in The Mayor of
Casterbridge (Chapter XVI) the Mayor himself beheld
the unattractive exterior of Farfrae's erection.  A
phrase can paint an astonishing picture for the reader.
Consider Dickens' sharp image in Bleak House (Chapter
LIV) when he describes how Sir Leicester leans
back in his chair, and breathlessly ejaculates.... 
Or, in Nicholas Nickleby (Chapter XLVII), where that
admirable novelist graphically portrays how old Arthur
Gride again raised his hands, again chuckled,
and again ejaculated.  And in his short tale, Lionizing ,
Edgar Allan Poe is quite candid in describing the reaction
of one of his characters:  ` Admirable! ' he ejaculated,
thrown quite off his guard by the beauty of the
manoeuvre.
Alas for perfectly lovely words that acquire pejorative
meanings over the years!  Earlier in this century,
pansy became a derogatory epithet to describe an effete
male, thereby cheapening forever lines like Shelley's
noble image in Adonais (verse XXXIII):
His head was bound with pansies over-blown,
not to mention Poe's odd allusion in For Annie :
With rue and the beautiful Puritan pansies.
Or, more slap-stickish, E.F. Benson's action picture in
Lucia in London (Chapter 8): Georgie stepped on a
beautiful pansy.
Of more recent vintage is gay .  Nobody used to
snicker at Chaucer's line (No. 5818) in The Prologe of
the Wyf of Bathe , in which that harried dame asks:
Why is my neghebores wif so gay?
In his poem The Menagerie , one of William
Vaughan Moody's characters advises:
If nature made you so graceful, don't get gay,
while in Othello (ah, the Bard again!)  in his dialogue
with Desdemona and Emilia on the praise of women,
Iago refers to the kind that
Never lack'd gold, and yet went never gay.
(Act II, Scene I, line 150)
And what in the world is one to make of William
Butler Yeats's startling revelation in his poem Lapis
Lazuli (from Last Poems ) that
They know that Hamlet and Lear are gay.?
Indeed it is an amusing, albeit utterly wasteful
pastime to pursue the quest for Red Pants examples.
May good cess befall all such quixotically misguided
readers!  One caveat: never assume blithely that an odd
word or suspicious phrase is as lubricious as it sounds.
In The Bride of Lammermoor (Chapter VI) Bucklaw
vows, I will chop them off with my whinger, and one
feels quite let down when he learns that a whinger is
but a whinyard, which is merely a short sword.
Turning a corner of the Mazza Gallerie into a women's
tennis store, I was startled to see ... hordes of giggling high
school girls ...  [From an article by Dorothy Gilliam in
the Washington Post , .  Submitted by .]
LIGHT REFRACTIONS
If you are a fan of old-fashioned jazzwhat is now
known as traditional or trad jazzyou are familiar
with one of the standard jump tunes of the
genrea tune most commonly called Muskrat Ramble .
Even if you are not a fan, you must have heard it
as least a dozen times.  It is the one that goes, Dah!
Dah!  Dah!  Dah!  da-dat-dat-dah!  Da-de-da-de-da-de-dat-dat-dah
!  da-de-da-de-da-de-dat-dat-dah!
That's it; sure; you've heard it.
I think I first bought a recording of Muskrat Ramble
back in about 1940, when I was in my early teens.
My memory is rickety, but I am sure my first recording
was labeled MUSKRAT RAMBLE, and I think, though I
am less sure, that it was played by the late Muggsy
Spanier, who was, to my mind, one of the greatest of
jazz trumpeters.  Later, I got another recording of the
same tune, this one by, I think, Mezz Mezzrow.  The
label said, MUSKAT RAMBLE.  I thought that was surely
the first time I had ever seen such an obvious typographical
error in, of all things, a simple title on a
simple 78-rpm record.  (This, remember, was in my
youth, and it was a time when typographical errors
were called typographical errors, not typosat least
by kids in junior high.)  Some time later, I got still
another version of MUSKRAT RAMBLE, with still another
version of the title.  This time, it was MUSCAT RAMBLE.
That, I thought, was really absurd.  Not only had they
left out the R; they'd changed the K to C.  Now, it
made no sense at all.  On the other hand, I reasoned, if
there were, in fact, some sort of cat called a muscat,
perhaps it wasn't so outrageous.  I looked up muscat in
my Webster's and found that it is a `variety of grape.'
To name a ramble after a variety of grape seemed to
me preposterous.  I was young and, by today's standards,
at least, pathetically innocent.
During my time in senior high, and, after that, in
the Army Air Force, I had other things on my mind
(there was a war on, after all), and I didn't give
the MUSKRAT-MUSKAT-MUSCAT RAMBLE problem any
thought.
Speaking of my time in the AAF, which was utterly
undistinguished, I think I must make a confession.
Now might be as good a time as any to reveal a
theft I committed at an Air Force Base near Seymour,
Indiana.  It was winter and bitterly cold.  The wind
used to sweep across that damned airfield with what
seemed an absolute determination to crystallize our
bodies.  One day when the wind chill factor was nearing
absolute zero, I took shelter in the service club.
There was the omnipresent phonograph, or Vic , short
for Victrola, and the stack of records next to it.  In
those days, people as a rule did not take much care of
phonograph records.  Usually the records were taken
from their jackets and loaded naked in stacks, where
they picked up dust, scratched one another, and
traded static electricity.  I was shuffling through a stack
of about fifty records, and I came across three Bessie
Smiths.  I played all three, and the few other G.I.s in
the room, which was quite largebig enough for a
fair-sized dance with a small orchestraeither paid
no attention or asked me to put on something by Glenn
Miller or Jimmy or Tommy Dorsey instead.  Among
Bessie's numbers were Dying Gambler's Blues, Sing
Sing Prison Blues , and one I had never heard called
Black Mountain Blues , which has the imcomparable
lines,
Home in Black Mountain a chile' will smack yo'
face;
Home in Black Mountain a chile' will smack yo'
face;
Babies cry for liquor an' all the birds sing bass.
and
Goin' back to Black Mountain, me an' my razor
an' my gun;
Goin' back to Black Mountain, me an' my razor
an my gun;
Goin' cut him if he stan' still, goin' shoot him if he
run.
I was, and still am, captivated by Babies cry for
liquor an' the birds sing bass, and in the arrogance of
my youth, I was certain that nobody else on the airfield
either knew or cared who Bessie Smith was, nor
would any other G.I. be enchanted by basso birds, so I
turned thief.  I can't remember how I did it, but somehow
I smuggled those records back to my barracks and
got them home intact on my next furlough.  I kept
them in good shape until my last 78-rpm turntable
died.
End of digression and back to MUSKRAT-KAT-CAT:
Muskrat Ramble is credited to Edward Kid Ory and
Ray Gilbert.  Kid Ory played great jazz trombone.
The only thing I know about Gilbert is that I find him
listed as co-author of Muskrat Ramble .
About thirty years ago, when I was concocting an
epicurean dish and saw that I had no sherry on hand, I
went to the liquor store and bought a bottle of muscatel
that was being sold for an absurdly low price and
that I thought might be exactly right for my sauce.  It
wasn't bad, The wine jogged my thoughts back to
Muscat Ramble .  Muscatel is made from muscat
grapes, is sometimes called muscat , and, being relatively
cheap and sweet and high in alcohol content, is
the booze of choice for a great many wines.  An old
college friend of mine who celebrated his twentieth
birthdaymeaning twenty years of AA sobrietya
couple of years ago, tells me that when he was on the
skids and riding the rails from drunk tank to drunk
tank, the favorite terms for muscat were muscadoodle
and Napa Valley smoke .
I made up my mind that Muscat Ramble was
almost certainly the original name of the tune.  My
reasoning is that it is not likely that Kid Ory or Ray
Gilbert had ever seen a muskrat, and it's even less
likely that they or anyone else has ever seen a muskrat
doing anything that we would be likely to think of as
rambling.  Muskrats, according to my encyclopedia,
look like giant rats, are found in and around the
mudbanks bordering marshes and quiet ponds, have
partially webbed feet, and do a good deal of swimming.
They do not appear to do much rambling.  Muscat,
or muscatel, on the other hand, is found on skid
rows all over the land.  A guy with a bottle-shaped
brown paper bag, damp and wrinkled at its upper
end, has almost certainly been slugging down a sweet
wine of high proof, and the odds are pretty good you
would find it is a muscadoodle .  After the guy finishes
his Napa Valley smoke and has slept it off, he is looking
for the means to get another muscat fix.  Now he is on a
ramble with his hand out and a pleading look in his
roadmapped eyes.  I suspect that that is precisely the
song's origin.
My theory is that the r got put in there simply
because muskrat is a more common word than muscat .
It is the same reason most of us, I assume, have heard,
He's in the hospital with prostrate trouble.  Prostrate
is a more common word that prostate , so prostrate is
what we get.  The r fits in naturally.  I got a strange
sort of corroboration from my good friend Rosy
McHargue, who is now pushing eighty-seven years and
has spent most of his life playing clarinet and sax with
some of the best jazzbandsBenny Goodman, Red
Nichols, Ted Weems, and a slew of others.  Rosy, too,
had seen the tune as Muskrat, Muskat , and Muscat .  I
asked him what he thought the original title was.  He
had known Kid Ory well, and he said, You know,
Tom, I'm not exactly sure.  I once asked Ory about it
and he said, `It's m-u-s-c-a-t.  Muskrat .'  So I think that's
just the way everyone said muscat .
There you are.  I find a muskrat ramble difficult to
imagine visually.  I picture muskrats wallowing about
in the mire and paddling sluggishly through the water,
but I wouldn't call that rambling.  On the other hand,
a wino with an empty paper bag on a ramble to maintain
his muscat levelnow that has a touch of poetry.
Maybe not in the same class with all the birds sing
bass, but poetry, nevertheless.
As a nonexpert, although interested, subscriber to
VERBATIM, it is a bit mysterious to me that the singular
noun absence takes the plural verb are .  I refer to
the first sentence of your article about the Longman
Dictionary [XV,1].
Helen W. Power, in Women on Language;
Women in Language, [XV,2] may bewail the insensitivity
of the male.  But she betrays her own elitist insensitivity
when she describes a flight attendant as the
person who passes peanuts on an airplane.  I hope
Ms./Miss/Mrs. Power never needs to draw on the considerable
first-aid and emergency training that every
attendant must master.
Antipodean Newsletter
Leonard Bloomfield, having begun with a theory
of meaning which emphasized the environment in
which objects were present and named, had to add the
obvious proviso that we sometimes mention what is
not present.  I have lately been reading accounts of the
exploration of the western and northwestern deserts of
Australia in the 1870s and I have become very aware of
the effect absent necessities might have on the frequency
of particular items in discourse.  In the desert
the missing necessity is water.  As the explorer Ernest
Giles put it, the explorer's experience is a baptism
worse than that of firethe baptism of no water.
My impression was that in the journals of desert
explorers the word water , alone or in compounds, and
words relating to water, were unusually frequent.  It is,
I suppose, likely that people with little money must
think of money more than the well-off do and that the
hungry will dwell on thoughts of food and the thirsty
on drink.  Here was a chance to quantify such things.  I
decided to make a count of words relating to water in
reports of desert exploration.
Taking quite at random a single page (page 7) in
the journals of the Gregory brothers recording an early
(1846) exploration of country east and north of Perth, I
find the word water used fifteen times.  Ten pages on
(page 17), water occurs nine times but there are also
the related words stream (twice), well (twice), pool,
channel , and the circumlocution essential element.
Two words, dew and shower , refer in the context to the
presence of water; the rest are in contexts indicating its
absence.
I tried another explorer, Ernest Giles.  Taking
page 17 again, I was reminded that Giles is rather
given to semi-serious poetic diction at times, and we
find him referring to the presence of water in the Finke
River as the stream purling over its stony floor or,
quoting some bygone poet, brightly the brook through
the green leaflets, giddy with joyousness, dances
along.  Perhaps present water called for some stylistic
celebration.  Two hundred pages further on there is less
exuberance in the circumlocution that fluid so terribly
scarce in the region, and in three other references
water is simply water .  Giles is not always waxing poetic
and may, like other explorers, be useful as a source
for the history of Australian and general English.  His
use of the word tank to refer to a hollowed-out reservoir
(Gibson dug a small tank and the water soon
cleared) antedates the OED , for instance.
Since this linguistic-statistical study of an obsession
might well prove to be an important contribution
to psycholinguistics, I decided to make a larger sample
of watery words, choosing the straightforward journals
of Colonel Peter Egerton Warburton, who led an expedition
across the western interior of Australia in
1873-4.  In a randomly chosen sequence of ten pages
(151-60 of the published journal) there were twenty-eight
occurrences of the word water (eight of them in
compounds), no page being without at least one example.
In addition, there was a rich collection of words
relating to water, not necessarily indicating its presence.
Hoping to find a lake is included, though of
course it doesn't indicate the presence of water.  Even
words which are usually of more general reference are
brought into relation with water in a text like this.
Gum-trees or rocks (in areas of sand) appear as signs of
possible water.  Apart from these words and lake ,
words and phrases directly associated with thoughts of
water and reinforcing the sense of obsession include
pool, springs, drainage hole, clay hole, flood, channel,
water-courses, water-hole, rock-hole, drink, drinkable,
running water, stream , and native well .
The last two items merit comment.  Stream is often
said not to be used in Australia except in metaphorical
ways, normally being replaced by creek .
Warburton's use: sandbanks intercept the stream,
which finally splits into narow water-courses and
spreads itself over the plains, and so it ends as a creek
suggests a somewhat more complex relation between
the two words.  British-born explorers did not set out to
write Australian English, of course.  Gregory uses
stream in the way normal in England; Giles consistently
refers to gens in the hills of central Australia,
though glen is not current (outside place-names) in
contemporary Australian English.
The other name, native well is, as a later explorer
David Carnegie, author of Spinifex and Sand (1898),
points out, a misnomer.  He believes native wells are
essentially rock-holes (depressions in rock) buried in
fairly shallow sand, which, when hollowed out by the
natives, appear to be wells.  This sort of misnomer
leads Carnegie to suppose that to the uninitiated no
map is so misleading as that of West Australia where
lakes are salt-bogs without surface water, springs seldom
run, and native `wells' are merely tiny holes in the
rock, yielding from 0 to 200 gallons.
Carnegie also describes namma-holes and soaks as
sources of water.  Soaks are shallow wells sunk near the
base of an outcrop to tap an underground reservoir.
Namma-holes have been variously described; to Carnegie
they are depressions on the surface of rocks, often
with a rounded bottom, where stones are often found,
suggesting that the stones have something to do with
the formation of the holes.
Some nostalgic early Australians deplored the loss
in our speech of English country words, the glens and
streams (alive, anyway, in the journals of explorers),
coppices and brooks, woods, becks , and rivulets .  Perhaps
these words did not really fit.  We might have
done better with Arabic-speaking settlers.  Wadi , for
instance, would describe an inland creek rather well.
Be that as it may, a later Australian visitor to English
drizzle might feel nostalgic when thinking of the
parched and thirsty but water-obsessed vocabulary developed
in the drier areas of our sunburnt land.
Favorite Grammatical Game: Puzzling Pronouns
Here is a game just made to while away the hours
on a commuter train with your favorite author,
a perfect place to hunt for Puzzling Pronouns .
Fowler lists five instances where a careless writer
can go wrong.  There is really no excuse, Fowler says
(not he says!), but here we give examples of his third
case only, where there should not be two parties justifying
even a momentary doubt about which the pronoun
represents.  And here the deluge of printed matter
abounds with such specimens that one would
suppose them to be the rule rather than the exceptions.
It is a game that is like fishing in a barrel, but more
stimulating mentally.  I am not picking on the following
authors; it is just a random catch.
In Thomas Hardy's The Hand of Ethelberta , it is
suggested by Ethelberta that she and some others go to
see Milton's tomb in Cripplegate church.  Her suitor,
Neigh, who had proposed marriage in a previous
chapter, appears somewhat apprehensive at Ethelberta's
suggestion.  This apprehension is observed by a
Mr. Belmaine and mistaken by him for an indication
that Neigh has been dragged into going to the church
against his will by his over-hasty wife.  One wonders
whether the marriage had secretly taken place between
the consecutive chapters!  You see, it is
Belmaine's wife who was doing the dragging.
Somerset Maugham was a good and careful grammarian
but now and then he slipped.  In The Letter , a
solicitor, Mr. Joyce, is approached by a Mr. Crosbie:
He spoke beautiful English, accenting each word
with precision, and Mr. Joyce had often wondered
at the extent of his vocabulary....
Sometimes I wonder about the extent of my own vocabulary,
too, but really, not when I'm interviewing a
client.
From The Once and Future King , by T. H.
White:
Naturally it was Lancelot who rescued her.  Sir Boss
had managed to find him at the abbey, during his
two days' absence, and now he came back in the
nick of time to fight Sir Mador for the queen.  Nobody
who knew him would have expected him to
do anything else, whether he had been sent away in
disgrace or notbut, as it was thought he had left
the country, his return did have a dramatic quality.
Not to say a quality of confusionpronoun-cedly so.
From Oh What a Paradise it Seems , by John
Cheever:
The size of Chisholm's teeth, the thickness of his
glasses, his stoop and the spring with which he
walked all marked him, Sears thought, as a single-minded
reformer.  His marriage, Sears guessed,
would have been unsuccessful and his children
would have difficulty finding themselves.
No wonder  we've lost them already.
Mark Twain poses us a little mystery in Pudd'nhead
Wilson: which knife does the killing?  Quiet now.
Lights, action:
I was asleep, but Luigi was awake, and he thought
he detected a vague form nearing the bed.  He
slipped the knife out of the sheath and was ready,
and unembarrassed by hampering bedclothes, for
the weather was hot and we hadn't any.  Suddenly
that native rose at the bedside, and bent over me
with his right hand lifted and a dirk in it aimed at
my throat; but Luigi grabbed his wrist, pulled him
downward, and drove his own knife into the man's
neck.  That is the whole story.
Well, was it Luigi's knife or the native's?  If we had only
that scene to go by we would never really know, and
all because of a Puzzling Pronoun or two!
Oh, it can lead one to a rhymed couplet:
He loves his brother and his wife,
Does he live a double life?
Give me my grammatical games any day to a crossword
puzzle.
The Joys and Oys of Yiddish
Rabbi Robert Schenkerman
Temple Beth Jacob
When Isaac Bashevis Singer was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Literature in 1978, he remarked
in his acceptance speech:
The high honor bestowed upon me is also a recognition
of the Yiddish languagea language of exile,
without a land, without frontiers, not supported
by any government, a language which
possesses no words for weapons, ammunition, military
exercises, war tactics.
There is a quiet humor in Yiddish and a gratitude
for every day of life, every crumb of success,
each encounter of love.  In a figurative way, Yiddish
is the wise and humble language of us all, the idiom
of a frightened and hopeful humanity.
The word Yiddish derives from the German
judisch `Jewish.'  The principal parent of Yiddish is
High German, the form of German encountered by
Jewish settlers from northern France in the eleventh
century.  Yiddish is written in the characters of the
Hebrew alphabet and from right to left and enjoys
borrowing words from Russian, Polish, English, and
all the other languages and countries along the routes
that Jews have traveled during the past thousand years.
Journalist Charles Rappaport once quipped, I speak
ten languagesall of them Yiddish.
Although Yiddish has been in danger of dying out
for hundreds of years, the language is spoken today by
millions of people throughout the worldRussia, Poland,
Rumania, France, England, Israel, Africa,
Latin America, New Zealand, Australia, Canada, and
the United States, where, like the bagel, it was leavened
on both coasts, in New York and Hollywood.  It is
spoken even in Transylvania: A beautiful girl awakens
in bed to find a vampire at her side.  Quickly she holds
up a cross. Zie gernisht helfen, smiles the vampire.
Translation: It won't do you any good.
Most of us already speak a fair amount of Yiddish
(Yinglish) without fully realizing it.  Webster's Third
New International Dictionary lists about 500 Yiddish
words that have become part of our everyday conversations,
including:
cockamamy (or cockamamie) `mixed-up, ridiculous.'
fin slang for `five-dollar bill,' from finf, the Yiddish
word for `five.'
gun moll a double clipping of gonif's Molly, Yiddish
for `thief's girl.'
kibitzer `one who comments, often in the form of
unwanted advice, during a game, often cards.'
mavin `expert.'
mazuma `money.'
mish-mosh `mess.'
schlep to `drag or haul.'
schlock `shoddy, cheaply produced merchandise.'
schmeer the `entire deal,' the `whole package.'
schnoz slang for `nose.'
yenta `blabbermouth, gossip; woman of low
origins.'
... and so on through the whole megillah : `long,
involved story.'
A number of poignant Yiddish words defy genuine
translation into English:
chutzpa `nerve; unmitigated gall;' a quality we
admire within ourselves, but never in others.  In
his delightful study, The Joys of Yiddish (McGraw-Hill
1968), Leo Rosten offers two classic
definitions.  Chutzpa is that quality enshrined in
a man, who, having killed his mother and father,
throws himself on the mercy of the court because
he is an orphan.  A chutzpanik may be defined as
the man who shouts `Help!  Help!'  while beating
you up.
mensch a `real authentic human beinga person.'
naches the `glow of pleasure-plus-pride that only
a child can give to its parents': This is my son,
the Doctor!
oy not so much a word as an entire vocabulary, as
Rosten observes: can express any emotion, from
trivial delight to the blackest woe.
oy vay; oy vay in mir literally, Oh, pain, but, in
its long or short form, can be used for anything
from condolence to lament:
On August 6, 1945, the world's first nuclear
weapon was dropped on Hiroshima, Japan.  Two
hundred and eighty-two thousand human beings
died and tens of thousands more were left
burned, maimed, and homeless.  [Albert] Einstein,
whose letter to Roosevelt had initiated the
American effort that resulted in the atom bomb
and whose special theory of relativity formed its
theoretical basis, heard the news on the radio.
For a long time he could only find two Yiddish
words traditionally used by Jews in such circumstances:
Oi vey.
The Little, Brown Book of Anecdotes
tsuris the gamut of painful emotionssome real,
some imagined, some self-inflicted.
Yiddish is especially versatile in describing those
poor souls who inhabit the world of the ineffectual,
and each is assigned a distinct place in the gallery of
pathetic types: schmo, schmendrik, schnook, schmegegge,
schlep, schlub, schmuck, putz, klutz, kvetch ,
and nudnik .  Yiddish easily coins new names for new
personalities: a nudnik is a `pest'; a phudnik is a `nudnik
with a Ph.D.'  The rich nuances that suffuse this
roll call are seen in the timeless distinction between a
schlemiel `clumsy jerk' and a schlimazel `habitual
loser': the schlemiel inevitably trips and spills his hot
soupall over the schlimazel.  (And the nebbish is the
one who has to clean it up.)
The Yiddish language, through its color, its target-accurate
expressions, its raw idioms, and its sayings
exudes a refreshing magic and laughter, mixed with
sober thought, that has been handed down from generation
to generation and from nation to nation.  Yiddish
never apologizes for what it isthe earthy, wise
soul of an expressive people learning that life is but a
mingled yarn, good and ill together.
Which reminds us of the zaftig `buxom, well-rounded'
blonde who wore an enormous diamond to a
charity ball.  It happens to be the third most famous
diamond in the whole world, she boasted.  The first is
the Hope diamond, then comes the Kohinoor, and then
comes this one, which is called the Lipschitz.
What a stone!  How lucky you are!
Wait, wait, said the lady.  Nothing in life is all
mazel [`good luck'].  Unfortunately, with this famous
Lipschitz diamond comes also the famous Lipschitz
curse.
The other women gasped and asked, And what is
the famous Lipschitz curse?
Lipschitz, sighed the lady.
The Women's History of the Word
Those who are not familiar with feminist writings
may find it useful and interesting to consider a book,
recently published in Britain, that is typical of the
harsher brand of such works.  The work in question
offers nothing regarding language, so its review here is
ancillary to the main function of VERBATIM.  The feminist
movement is very much alive in Britain, and the
Greenham Common Women are probably largely
responsible for much of the national sentiment against
the Cruise missiles installed at an American base near
that village.  In Britain, as elsewhere, most books by
feminist writers are reviewed by women, usually feminists.
Men are seldom assigned to review them, possibly
because the editor fears that they will be either
ignorant of or unsympathetic to the issues raised, if not
biased against them, or because the editor is a woman.
Because writing an unfavorable review of a (bad) feminist
book would be tantamount to treachery, such
books are often unjustifiably praised, as was the case
with this work by Rosalind Miles, which was well received
on its publication in June.
According to the blurb on the dust jacket of this
distinctly unpleasant book, Rosalind Miles is head of
the Centre for Women's Studies at Coventry Polytechnic,
a lecturer, broadcaster, journalist, and author of
several other books, including a highly acclaimed
biography of Ben Jonson.  One might like to believe
that this gives her the cachet of authoritative scholarship,
but the text does not bear out the promise.
For the most part, the book consists of a rewriting
of history, from the dawn of time, with the purpose of
demonstrating two main themes: the fact that
women were responsible for all the important contributions
to the advancement of civilization (as the development
of agriculture, for instance), often despite
the arrogance and stupidity of men; and the fact
that women have long been subjected to domination
by men.  Miles suggests that such domination is a recent
phenomenononly a couple of thousand years
oldfor she points to the clear superiority of women
in (primitive) religions and matriarchies, right on
through to the Egyptian dynastic rulers.  At one point,
she gets so carried away with her thesis that she suggests
that females were responsible not only for all of
human evolutionary biology but for the very notion of
counting (in order to keep track of menstruation) and,
probably by the same token, astronomy.  She quotes
(and, presumably, accepts) another source which holds
that woman first awakened in humankind the capacity
to recognize abstracts.  If you believe that balderdash,
you'll believe anything.
In the good old days, we were taught that the
pyramids were built by tens of thousands of slaves.
Recent speculation has it that they were not slaves
butwhat would one call them?  ordinary laborers.
Here comes Miles, authoritatively quoting Diodorus,
the Greek historian, who recorded (60-30BC) that innocent
women even swelled the ranks of pitiful slaves
whose forced labour built the pyramids:
... bound in fetters, they work continually
without being allowed any rest by night or day.
They have not a rag to cover their nakedness, and
neither the weakness of age nor women's infirmities
are any plea to excuse them, but they are driven by
blows until they drop dead.  [p.49]
As the pyramids were already about 2500 years old
when Diodorus wrote his World History , one is given
to wonder what his authority might have been for such
a vivid description.  It is even less comprehensible how
a modern researcher could accept it and have the effrontery
to promulgate it.  Miles's book is riddled with
many similar distortions, convenient omissions, and
generalizations:
... Women have always commanded over half
the sum total of human intelligence and creativity.
From the poet Sappho, who in the sixth century BC
was the first to use the lyric to write subjectively
and explore the range of female experience, to the
Chinese polymath Pan Chao (Ban Zhao), who
flourished around AD 100 as historian, poet, astronomer,
mathematician and educationalist, the range
is startling.  In every field, women too numerous to
list were involved in developing knowledge and
contributing to the welfare of their societies as they
did so: the Roman Fabiola established a hospital
where she worked both as nurse and doctor, becoming
the first known woman surgeon before she
died in AD 399.  [p.52]
Earlier, on page 49, we learnt about Agnodice, who
lived to become the world's first known woman gynaecologist,
in the fourth century BC.  Clearly, this rosily
checkered past was soon to be replaced, chiefly, it
seems, as Judeo-Christian-Islamic-Confucian-Buddhist
cultures flourished.  It was not too bad early on,
when, according to Miles, the seven Maccabean martyrs
who saved Judaism did so only at the instigation
of their mother.  Miles continues:
In early Christianity likewise, women found not
merely a role, but an instrument of resistance to
male domination; in choosing to be a bride of
Christ they inevitably cocked a snook at lesser male
fry.  Thousands of young women helped to build
the church of God with their body, blood and
bones when frenzied fathers, husbands or fiancs
preferred to see them die by fire, sword or the
fangs of wild beasts rather than live to flout [sic]
the duty and destiny of womanhood.  [p.63]
But the situation soon deteriorated:
Even St. Paul, later the unregenerate prophet of
female inferiority, was forced to acknowledge the
help he received from Lydia, the seller of purple
dyes in Philippi.  [ibid.]
This rewriting of history is punctuated by an array
of four-letter invectives applied to males and by
adjectives like brilliant, unusual, inspiring , and so
forth to women.  Citing a Judaic law-book of the 16th
century which identified a woman for the days preceding,
during, and following her period as niddah
`impure,' Miles has the lack of taste to write the following:.
As a final stroke, in a grim foreshadowing of
what the future held in store for the Jews, the niddah
had to wear special clothing as a badge of her
separate and despised status.  [p.83]
Here and there in this morass of misunderstanding,
Miles treads on solid ground if one can agree with
the eminent anthropologist Joseph Campbell.  Campbell,
known for his extensive analyses of the world's
mythologies, religions, and cultures, noted the marked
bias against women emerging from Judaic concepts,
later reinforced by Christian and Islamic doctrine.
Most of the religions of the world connected woman
with mother earth, fertility, and all the other
progenetic and nurturing associations, and this was
borne out in the cultures of the people.  According to
Campbell, the only godlike female figure in the Bible
is the Virgin Mary, and she appears, identified as virgin,
only in the Gospel according to Luke.  As Luke was
a Greek, Campbell suggested that Mary was a carryover
from the paganism of the ancient Greek pantheon.
Although this might help explain the Judeo-Christian-Muslim
tendencies to subjugate women,
treating them essentially as chattel, it does not account
for a similar treatment accorded them in other cultures,
notably that of Japan.  It is not entirely clear
whether Campbell was commenting on Hinduism,
Buddhism, etc. as they once existed, conceptually, for
it is unlikely that he could have ignored the treatment
of women in the modern reflexes of the cultures adhering
to those religous precepts.
Campbell held that the ancient mythologies and
religions are allegorical and that there was no real
distinction between gods and goddesses, who were
given sexual identity when in human form only to
make them more meaningful.  With all respect, that
seems a highly debatable issue and one far too complex
for this discussion, though we can certainly trace a
diminution in the role of female divinities (or divinity)
when we come to examine Judaism and its congeners
and progeny.  Other debatable aspects are the questions
of whether the debasement of women is a reflection of
the theology or the ritual, whether the scripture of any
religion should be understood allegorically or literally,
and so forth.  If there is something wrong, it behooves
us to get at the roots of the problem, not to flail about
wildly, for only after the source of a disease has been
identified can one properly investigate its cure.
History according to Rosalind Miles blasts away
at the symptoms in a misconceived notion that alleviating
them will effect a cure of the disease.  In this
jeremiad, males are viewed as the enemy, and are so
characterized throughout the book, which concludes
with exhortations to engage the foe and a strident call
to arms (though not men's).
Laurence Urdang
Archaeology & Language
[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection.]
Just when you thought it was safe to assume that
we now know all we are ever likely to know about the
past, someone digs another hole and unearths (literally
or figuratively) some ancient artifact: one day it is a
fragile scroll, found in a cave near the Dead Sea, that
turns out to be pre-Biblical; the next day it is an entire
terracotta army of Chinese soldiers: the next it is a
skull, excavated from the Olduvai Gorge, that compels
anthropologists (once again) to revise their guesses
about the earliest stages of Homo sapiens sapiens vs
hominids.  Most of the relies from the past are gone
forever, destroyed by the plows of countless generations
of farmers, reduced to rubble by erosion, by conquerors,
by prehistoric (and modern) urban developers, by
fire and flood, and just by time.  Many, we may hope,
have not yet been found.  The interest in man's forebears
did not become fashionable upon the publication,
a few years ago, of Roots : on a far larger scale,
we have been trying to discover all we can about the
origins not of men but of man.  Strange to say, however,
that interest does not seem to be more than a few
hundred years old: if the ancient Greeks and Romans,
the Indians, the Chinese and other peoples were curious
about their own prehistory, I have not heard of it.
Perhaps the fascination with man's past grew out of
the obsession with ruins evinced by Romanticism; certainly,
modern archaeology seems to have followed
close behind, for the excavation of the supposed site of
Troy took place only about 100 years ago.  Perhaps it is
just as well, for only by the means available to modern
science are we now able to preserve some of the artifacts
that we find and, through radiocarbon dating,
determine their approximate age.
Archaeology is a popular pursuit, and its manifest
results not only receive considerable publicity but can
be seen in museums.  Not so paleolinguistics, or the
reconstruction of ancient languages.  Even the remnants
we have from early languages that had a writing
system are relatively sparse: Classical Latin and
Greek, Hebrew, and a few other languages are better
documented than others; but for most all we have to go
on are a handful of tablets here, a few inscriptions
there, barely enough in many cases to allow us to
identify the language, let alone draw any conclusions
regarding its structure or meaning.  Perhaps one day
we shall find an Etruscan library, buried deep in the
Italian countryside; but for the present, we have to
make do with what we have, which is precious little.
About languages that had no writing system, we know
nothing at all.  But some very clever comparative linguists,
beginning in Germany in the 19th century, theorized
about how the nature of the ancestors of the
more modern tongues.  In some instances, ancient languages
have been decoded, some from multilingual
inscriptions.  The work of Jean Francois Champollion
(1790-1832) in deciphering hieroglyphics from the Rosetta
Stone was an astonishing accomplishment, for it
enabled us to read the myriad writings of the ancient
Egyptians on papyrus and in wall inscriptions and
revealed an enormous amount of the knowledge we
have today about their civilization, which lasted for
about 2600 years.  Another significant break-through
was that of Michael Ventris (1922-1956), who deciphered
the Linear B script found on Crete and identified
it as an early form of Greek.  From the standpoint
of language, Ventris's work was more important, particularly
because it filled in a gap in our knowledge of
the early states of Indo-European languages.
Many years ago, a linguistic scholar counted all of
the languages then spoken of which he had evidence.
The total was approximately 2800, but that is probably
only a vague estimate: he undoubtedly missed
some; some have sprung up since his time (modern
Hebrew, for instance); and some have vanished.  The
exact count is unimportant and, at best, spurious, for
it is extremely difficult to establish uniform criteria for
what distinguishes dialect from language.  Then, too,
one must examine the techniques used to group the
many languages of the world.
Linguists examining Classical Greek, Latin, German,
English, Slavic, Swedish, Norwegian, Danish,
Dutch, Lithuanian, Iranian, Hindi, and the other languages
of India and Europe found that there were
correspondences among many of the common words.
Some, like French, Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese,
had more in common with one another than they did
with, say, German, English, Swedish, Danish, and
Dutch, which, in turn, bore only a remote resemblance
to Russian and Polish, on the one hand, and the
two extant varieties of, say, Gaelic, on the other.  One
rapidly runs out of hands and must resort to fingers
and toes, for after years of laboriously categorizing
these languages, the number of different main
branches (called families and subfamilies) came to
about ten.  Ingeniously, certain differences between
families were explained by various phonetic shifts that
(inexplicably) took place in one language group but
not in another.  Although certain other languages were
geographically nearby, it was impossible to establish
any resemblances between them, hence Basque, for
example, is not classified as being in the same family
with other European languages, nor are Hungarian
and Finnish, both of which belong to their own group.
At the conclusion of this vast exercise, done without
the aid of computers, there emerged a pattern of familial
relationships that linked together languages spoken,
in earlier times, from Britain as far east as Chinese
Turkestan and from India as far north as
Lappland.  Charts showing the chief languages and
their derivations can be found in many dictionariesinside
the front cover of The Random House Unabridged ,
for example.  Because linguists are constantly
learning more and more about the relationships
among languages, it is best to avoid using an older
chart; for the same reason, it would be wise not to
stake too much on the accuracy of even a current
chart.
The languages discussed here are what are usually
called the Indo-European family; similar family trees
could be drawn for the Semitic languages, Sino-Tibetan,
Japanese, Bantu, Malayo-Polynesian, and so on.
Each is a distinct phylum; although there may be
word-borrowing among them, lexicon is considered
less important in the classification of languages than
structure and grammar.  It is important, too, to note
that writing systems are irrelevant: for instance, Polish
is written (today) using the Roman alphabet, but Russian,
a related Slavic language, uses the Cyrillic; Yiddish,
a Germanic language, is written in Hebrew characters;
Latin, Greek, and Sanskrit, which resemble
one another rather closely in some respects, all use
different alphabets; and early examples, utterly unrecognizable
to untrained readers of modern languages,
were written in cuneiform, quite suitable for writing
on soft clay tablets with a pointed stylus, and hieroglyphics.
It would be nice to think that while linguists were
working so hard to organize languages, they were
working alongside the archaeologists who were providing
the raw materials.  But only rarely did they collaborate
and, with few exceptions, their work was not
correlated in a systematic way.  Schliemann, who discovered
the site of Troy, used the evidence in Homer's
Iliad to determine his digging site, where any ruins
had long since disappeared from view.  In many other
places, the ancient sites lay buriedand still
dobeneath modern cities: modern property owners
quite understandably take a dim view of tearing down
their buildings on the off chance that the remnants of
an ancient town will be found several yards below.
today, before a new building is erected in London, an
archaeological team examines the cleared site for its
archaeological significance.  But there, as everywhere
else, nothing can interfere with progress and, regardless
of the finds and their importance, the archaeologist
must eventually yield to the bulldozer.  Notwithstanding,
even the brief glimpses afforded by such
investigations can provide some insight into civilizations
that existed hundreds or, in some cases, thousands
of years earlier.
Based on the sparse evidence available, linguists
theorized about the earlier languages that had given
rise to those attested.  In other words, based on what
they knew about a group of languages which were
documented, they tried to imagine the language that
they sprang from.  In most cases, they dealt with words
and functional elements, creating what are called reconstructions
in hypothetical family prototypes called,
variously, Proto-Latin, Proto-Greek, Proto-Germanic,
Proto-Indo-Iranian, and so forth, the ultimate goal
being to posit a single language called Proto-Indo-European.
That is not entirely true, for linguists know
too much about language to suggest that there ever
was, literally, a single language from which all Indo-European
languages descended.  Nonetheless, it is convenient
to think about the existence of a group of
proto-dialects which can be referred to as Proto-Indo-European.
It seems only natural that once an original language,
or Ursprache , was posited, the next step was to
speculate on its source, or Urheimat .  That is what
Renfrew has tried to do.  Essentially, he proposes that
the parent of all Indo-European languages was itself
born in central Anatolia, whence it spread eastward,
westward, and northward, being modified by the influences
of the languages with which it came into contact,
till it ultimately emerged in its recognizable,
modern manifestations which we categorize into Germanic,
Hellenic, Italic, Indo-Iranian, Anatolian, Armenian,
Celtic, Tocharian, Albanian, and BaltoSlavic.
I have no quarrel with Renfrew's theorynotwithstanding
the generally received wisdom that has
placed the homeland north of the Black Sea region
and the Volga steppes.  It is difficult for the nonspecialist
reader (like me) to assess the validity of his arguments,
which are based on his contention that the
language (and its congeners) were carried along by the
spread of nomad pastoralism.  Using the evidence available,
Renfrew contends that the original Indo-European
language, closely related to Hittite, separated
after 6500 BC, with the IE languages of western Europe
developing from western Anatolia and those of
Iran, India, and Pakistan from the eastern division.
The choice between the prevailing theory and Renfrew's
depends on whether one accepts a wave theory,
first promulgated more than a hundred years ago
by Johnanes Schmidt, a German linguist, or one of
indigenous development.  Pottery finds can be interpreted
to support either the imposition of an elite culture
from Turkmenia or a late development of the
Indus civilization.  Renfrew accepts the wave theory,
and in the last two thirds of Archaeology & Language
he sets forth his arguments in its favor.  Unfortunately,
the presentation of his linguistic argument, where the
author is clearly treading on more speculative ground
than in those parts dealing with outright archaeology,
where he is on more familiar territory, is disorganized
and repetitious.  It is difficult to place all the blame on
Renfrew, for his editor should have noticed the lack of
coherence.  The result is an argument that is persuasive
but scarely convincing.
Nevertheless, good books on archaeology assimilable
by laymen are not easy to find, and if the reader
can tolerate its shortcomings and is not overly concerned
about the precise birthplace of Indo-European,
Archaelogy & Language provides an interesting march
through the millennia of prehistory in seven-league
boots.
Laurence Urdang
Webster's Electronic Thesaurus
This software consists of two disks, one labeled
Installation and Program, the other Synonym Linguibase,
and a manual.  The manual sets forth everything
with clarity, and the program is simple to install, requiring
only a few minutes.  Only one thing made me a
little suspicious when cranking up the system: in the
descriptive text that appears on the screen, the word
labeled is spelt labelleddecidedly un-American.
However, I went ahead, and, since I was typing the
text you are reading, returned to the beginning of the
paragraph to see how some of these words would fare.
I looked up the word preceding and was, after a brief
moment, asked to type in the word, which I did.  The
screen bloomed forth with the following:
Query: preceding
1)  adj being before especially in time or arrangement
There were also some other parts of speech: one
definition for the preposition and three for the verb
(participial) senses.  I called up the synonyms for the
adj and the following appeared:
Synonyms:
antecedent, anterior, foregoing, former, past, precedent,
previous, prior
The way the program works is this: one uses the cursor
to highlight a particular word for which synonyms are
desired.  It is similar, in principle, to finding a synonym
in a synonym dictionary and then looking up its synonyms
to find them.  I am not sure why, but I expected
the program to network in the same way.  However,
when I highlighted antecedent , what appeared on the
screen was the same list of synonyms but with antecedent
missing, and preceding had reappeared.  If all this
is too complicated to follow, let me summarize: you
look up word X and get synonyms A, B, C, D, E, F,
and G.  You look up the synonyms for word A, and you
get synonyms X, B, C, D, E, F, and G.  Even the
definition provided for the sub-listings is identical in
wording to that of the word originally sought.
This is very economical of space and involves a
clever computer ploy, but it does not provide a particularly
useful synonym dictionary, for, as we all know,
synonymy in language does not yield to the commutative
law of mathematics; in language, Things equal to
the same thing are not (necessarily) equal to each
other.  Perhaps the Proximity people thought that they
had got round that little problem by giving the same
definition for each of the items in the list; but we know
that only very rarely are two synonyms bi-unique
(which is another way of saying that if A = B, B does
not necessarily always equal A), an ineluctable fact of
language.
If a relatively limited access to a synonym dictionary
is likely to be of use, then this package may be of
service.  It works with a hard disk or with a set of
floppies and can be used with 29 popular word-processing
programs.  (That was the number listed when I
received my copy; it might have increased.)  It also has
a few neat features, like suggesting a few alternatives if
you happen to think that preceding is spelt preceeding
(as many people do).  It has a useful Help feature
that can be called upon at any stage.  Also, if you
enter jump , you get the synonyms for that; but if you
enter jumped , you get the (same) synonyms but inflectedincluding
the variants leapt, leaped for leap .
All in all, for a relatively primitive system, it is not too
bad; but you would have to be in love with your computer
to use it in preference to a far more complete
books of synonyms available (especially The Synonym
Finder , Rodale in the U.S. and Canada, Longman
elsewhere, which offers more than 800,000 synonyms,
more than three times the number listed in any other
synonym book).
The blurb on this book/disk package reads, Supplies
you with 470,000 true synonyms for 40,000 entries.
My guess is that such a quantity might be
reached if one counted all the permutations and combinations;
in reality, though, there are probably far
fewer actual words.  Readers can judge for themselves
the validity of this numerical legerdemain.
Laurence Urdang
Family Words
In 1962, American Speech published Family
Words in English, by Allen Walker Read, which was
reprinted in VERBATIM Vol. I, No. 4, (1975).  The article
is a classic, probably the first on the subject to appear
in a scholarly journal, though there are other informal
references to family language, some of which are documented
by Dickson in his Bibliography.
Family words and expressions crop up everywhere.
Some are quite unique and their reporters cannot
imagine their origin; others, like Penn Station ,
what one family terms a child's misinterpretation of a
famous line or phrase, are clear: the generic term
comes from the Lord's PrayerAnd lead us not into
Penn Station.  Obviously, that works only for kids familiar
with New York City.  Other Penn Stations :
Our Father, which art in heaven, Harold be Thy
name.
Land where the Pilgrims pried.
Bells on cocktails ring.
I pledge my allowance to the flag.
Gladly the cross-eyed bear
Onward Christian Soldiers,
Marching as to War,
With the cross-eyed Jesus,
Leaning on the phone.
...One nation, invisible...
...One nation, in a vegetable...
Many people know F.H.B. for `family hold back,' an
exhortation ensuring ample provender for guests.
This is not to suggest that Dickson's book is a
catalogue of bloopers, or what Amsel Greene (and
Jack Smith) like to call pullet surprises .  There are
many interesting entries in Family Words which, as far
as I know, is the first documentation of the genre.
There are occasional hidden entries, as the list of diseasesamong
them the dread mohogus under the
entry for Fowlenzia .  (In the VERBATIM family, some
suffer from Fowler's pip , an affliction affecting language
fanatics who base a slavish purism on a literal
interpretation of Modern English Usage .)
Family Words is useful and fun.  Inevitably, some
of the entries are more imaginative than others; Dickson
will have his hands full if everyone responds giving
private words.  Please sent yours to the author, c/o Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA 01867, not to VERBATIM.
Laurence Urdang
A Midwesterner, Will Hays, Jr., who is proud of
his knowledge of post-Civil-War history, tells me the
following origin of shot , as in shotglass , absent from
Gunning for the English Language:
Although we associate trench warfare with World
War I, trenches were characteristic also of the Civil
War.  A scaffold was built so that a rifleman
who fired a single-shot, muzzle-loading shoulder
weaponcould step up and shoot over the top of the
trench.  The soldier in charge would command, after
each firing, that the rank on the scaffold step down
and be replaced by the rank that had just reloaded,
thus alternating ranks and sustaining the rifle fire.
That war, like others, produced disgruntled veterans
and those more adventurous or more restless after
military service.  They moved westward to start a new
life.  The population increased markedly, with corresponding
demands for goods and services, among them
the need for saloons.  Most new saloons were small and
the bars short, accommodating with difficulty the
many bunched up, in ranks, if you will, calling for
whiskey.  Many of the thirsty crowd were veterans, as
were many of the bartenders.  Thus, Step down (or
back) and give me a shot was readily understood.  I've
not been able to corroborate this explanation, but I'll
never forget it.
Mr. Joseph Hymes' Do MistakeLearn Better
[XV,1] brought to mind the time a Japanese acquaintance
told me of a friend of hers who decided to tackle
the original English version of three books she had
enjoyed while in Japan.  She boldly marched into a
bookstore and asked the salesclerk for a copy each of
Hemingway's The Sun Come Up Again and Throw
Away the Gun and Steinbeck's The Angry Grape .  Is
there a term for the errors that creep in while translating
a passage back into the original tongue?
Mr. Davidson's observations on the Scottishness of
Chambers 20th Century Dictionary [XV,1] bear out
my own formed over sixteen years of using one.  An odd
sidelight on this came a few days after reading the
article.  Definitions under pet end with Petting Party
(coll.) a gathering for the purpose of caressing as an
organised sport.  (Origin unknown; not from Gaelic) I
think it hardly fanciful to discern a note of Calvinist
disapproval in this curt disclaimer.
Although I greatly enjoyed Richard Lederer's article,
I fear that one of his paragraphs is a load of brass
monkey balls.
The monkey on board ship was a lad employed to
fetch suppliespowder and so forthto the guns.  The
word might also have been used for a receptacle near
the guns where powder and balls were kept.  However,
this receptacle would have taken the form of a wooden
box or something similar.  The idea of a metal stand
carrying a pyramid of cannon balls so delicately balanced
as to be affected by the tiny differential expansion
of brass and iron does not bear thinking about in a
heavy sea.
So what is the explanation of the phrase cold
enough to freeze the balls off a brass monkey ?  Well,
the obvious one, I believe.  Anybody who asks Why a
brass monkey? is probably not aware that brass monkeys
were very common household ornaments in England
in the 19th and early 20th centuries.  Originally,
they were probably imported from India, but were
later mass-produced in places such as Birmingham to
grace Victorian and Edwardian mantelshelves.  They
can still be found today in so-called gift shops.  Usually,
they come in sets of three, one with its hands over
its eyes, one over its ears, and one over its mouth: they
were said to represent See no evil, Hear no evil, Speak
no evil.  There were various whimsical variants.
I am sure I am not the first to point out Joseph
Hynes's, Do MistakeLearn Better, [XV,1] mistakes
in Japanizing English words, e.g., sei fu not safe-o,
nain not nine-o.  The possibilities for representing
English with a language of only forty-seven syllables
are not that numerous, and the rules are very consistent.
The main problems are representing consonant
clusters and word-final consonants.  These difficulties
produce such monstrosities as sutoraike for English
`strike'one syllable in English, five in Japanese.
Every Japan veteran has his list of favorite mistakes.
Mine are the ones that are possible, but wrong,
English.  Adding the Japanese final vowels produces
Gone with the Windo .  Hypercorrection, where Japanese
speakers learn that many final vowels do not exist
in the American version of the tongue and so remove
them, sometimes incorrectly, gives us the California
cities of San Francisk and Sacrament .  This process
resulted in the sign reading Pizz and Coffee .
My absolute favorite of these semantic mistakes,
however, does not come from the problem of sound.
Japanese has a verb inflection which expresses causation
or permissionin English, to make someone or
to let someone do something.  One day during a university
English class, a very discomfited student, after
frantic and obtrusive dictionary work, handed a colleague
of mine a scrap of paper.  On it was written this
sentence: Please make me go to the bathroom.
You Could Look It Up
As everyone in the world must know by now, William
Safire writes a column in The New York Times
Magazine called On Language.  Considering the circulation
of The New York Times on Sundays, his column
is probably the most widely read commentary on
contemporary English in the world; that places more
than one uncommon burden on a writer: he must do
his utmost to be accurate; he must try to select subjects
likely to be of interest to his readers; and he must
write well.
Those familiar with Safire's editorial style, reflected
in his political columns on the editorial pages
of The N. Y. Times , may agree with me in the contention
that when he writes about language he seems to
be writing on his day off: I cannot put my finger on
why, but On Language always strikes me as an excruciating
effort to be cute.  In part, that is attributable
to the designation of his correspondents, who
keep him informed on language that is not within
earshot, as the Lexicographic Irregulars, an amusing
reference the first time or two it was used but now
beginning to cloy.  More often than it might prove of
interest to me, personally, Safire deals with insiders'
language in Washington (where he is based) or with
trivialities uttered by some politico.
As Andrew Norman wrote, in a letter published in
this book on page 113, You flit freely back and forth
between prescriptivism and descriptivism.  But are not
many of us guilty of that?  We are descriptive of the
usages we accept and prescriptiveperhaps proscriptive
would be more descriptiveof those we do not
like.  At least Safire expresses an opinion; whether the
reader agrees with him is another matter, as are the
questions of his accuracy, which arise fairly often, and
that of the suitability of his style, which, as far as I
know, has not been broached before.  It ill behooves
me, excoriated recently as enamored of the cheap
larf, to criticize Safire's arch puns, which permeateenliven
is probably the word his editor would
usehis articles, but I find some kinds of humor unsuitable
for reading, however they might evoke a
chuckle when uttered viva voce .  A handful of examples,
from the book at hand:
Therefore, I stand uncorrected. [p. 112]
...Get your hand off my knee.  (That's a mnemonic,
pronounced knee-MONIC.)
Ize Right?  [title, p. 114]
Juggernaughty but Nice [title, p. 115]
...slanguist...[p. 116]
Lex Appeal [title, p. 121]
Logue-Rolling [title, p. 123]
[on -logue vs. -log:] Some people prefer their
logues sawed off...[p. 123]
But the Library of Congress wants to be non-U [in
its spelling of -logue words].  [ibid.]
Writing containing such labored figures makes for
hard reading.  I am interested in what Safire has to say
about language but find myself stymied: I get the feeling
that he has deliberately created a minefield of
interruptions in thought through which I must pick
my way to the end.  Notwithstanding the valuable role
he plays in inspiring nonlinguists to think about language
and in informing them about myriad facets of
the subject, I find it hard slogging (or, as he would
probably write, sloguing).
You Could Look It Up is the umpteenth collection
of Safire's columns and, like the previous collections,
contains a selection of letters from readers.  It is those
that are so sorely missed in his column.  True, there is
an occasional mention in his column of a point raised
by a correspondent, and the Letters section of the
Magazine prints a comment from time to time, but an
important feature of the books is their inclusion of far
more writer-reader interaction than one might suspect
from reading the column alone.  For one thing, the
letter-writers call attention to errors or misinterpretations
and are largely critical.  Safire cannot be accused
of being copy-proud (except, evidently, of awful puns,
as in  Ms. is deliberately msterious , but at least it is
not deliberately msleading  and other mscegenations).
There is no gainsaying that Safire is one of the
most influential writers on contemporary English, and
it is essential that his books be in the libraries of all
who are interested in the subject, regardless of their
alignment with his opinions.  For one thing, he documents
many neologisms, an activity that endears him
to many working lexicographers.  From the sometimes
cavalier manner in which he treats his subject, one
wonders if Safire feels the burden of the responsibility
he has toward his readers.
The publisher sent unrevised bound proofs from
which this review was prepared; unfortunately, there
was no proof of an index, but the publisher has assured
me that there will be one in the published book, a
rather essential ingredient of a work with this title.
Laurence Urdang
Webster's New World Guide to Current American
Usage
Here is a commonsense style book, useful to those
who have the education and common sense to be in
doubt about questions of English usage.  It has some
problems, if you want to be sticky about things: on p.
xv we read:
...Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity does
not say that E = MC and in leap year MC.
Indeed it does not.  But it does say E = mc ; the version
with the capital M and C is, essentially, meaningless
to those familiar with the conventional symbolism used
in physics.
While I acknowledge that it is not easy to know
how to sort out the many topics to be covered in a
usage book, most reasonable writers have taken a stab
at writing an entry under a heading that seems a likely
place to look, then have provided a detailed index.  Not
Bernice Randall.  True, one can find different from ,
etc., in an entry so headed, but for absolute constructions
one is referred to an entry called Covered with
onions, relish, and ketchup, I ate a hotdog at the ball-park.
If the user wants to find out about misplaced
adjectives and adverbs , reference is made to the entry
Electric shaver for women with delicate floral design
on the handle.  A search for only would be futile.
Perhaps the subject and treatment of usage need
some lightening up, but I am hard put to agree that
they are quite as frivolous and light-headed as this
book would have us believe.  Fun is fun, but those who
might rely on such a book are quite serious about the
information they are seeking, and it is unfair to play
fast and loose with their sincerity.  A sense of humor
about a subject is born of a feeling of security about it,
but security is the one characteristic often lacking
among those who would use Current American Usage .
There is no doubt that Randall enjoys her work.
But of what use is a long entry on spoonerisms?  And of
what use are the interminable examples, for instance,
of the misuse of like for as , which draw out the entry
to three pages?  More than four pages are devoted to
clichs (under the guise of Lo and behold, it's man's
best friend., which, being an exclamation, really
ought to end in an exclamation point).  The article on
British/American English (There's no home like Eaton
Place.) is a good one, but, at six pages, its utility is
questionable.  In the matter of pronunciations of
BrEng names, it is an old-fashioned fantasy of Americans
that Brits go round saying POM-frit for Pontefract :
most Brits that I have heard give the name a
spelling pronunciation these days; and so with many of
the old shibboleths.  Of what relevance (to usage, notwithstanding
the fact that the topic is interesting) is an
entry on eponyms (John Bull and John Hancock are
not just any johns.)?  That is not, strictly speaking, a
subject pertinent to the title of the book.
All of which is to say that the book is an interesting
work on the language and contains accurate,
though longwinded information about what it covers,
interesting and useful facts about American English.
Its only real faults are its title, which belies the content,
the cutesy headings, and the lack of a truly detailed
index: self-indexing does not provide coverage of
sufficient detail.  As a reference work on usage, it is far
from complete: The Simon and Schuster Publicity Department
could have used an entry on foreword/
forward (spelt foreward in the release accompanying
the review copy).
A longish section, Some Troublesome Idiomatic
Prepositions, and a Glossary of Grammatical and
Linguistic Terms Used in This Book, followed by a list
of References, sources associated with specific entries,
round out the work.
Laurence Urdang
Language Notes from Abroad
Once more unto the breach for the warriors of
1'Acadmie Franaise in their uphill battle to preserve
the purity of their native tongue.  Examples of franglais
which they find particularly monstrous are, I
hear, to be condemned to a newly created Muse des
horreurs.  The first is sponsor, sponsoriser, sponsorisation.
The academy also calls upon all French to send
in further examples of linguistic pollution, observing
ruefully that this is one museum which will be open 12
months a year.  But the savants have passed barman,
blazer, bobsleigh , and boycott as fit for inclusion in
their new dictionary.  [From The Times , 15 January
1988]
Letter to the Editor of The Times
Penny Perrick regrets (January 11) that There is
no word in English to describe that particular, special
sort of pride that one feels in the achievements of one's
children.  But the verb kvell , which exactly expresses
that emotion, is already (like other Yiddish loanwords,
such as chutzpah, meshugga and nosh ) to be found in
the Supplement to the Oxford-English Dictionary .
If you think that the practice in some Muslim countries
of amputating the hand of a thief is harsh, beware
of participating in horse shows in England,
where there is no capital punishment but the issue
arises every few years:
A carriage and team of Cleveland Bay horses,
driven by Mr Fred Pendlebury...[were] approaching
the water obstacle during the cross-country
section of the Harrods International Grand Prix
when the leading pair became confused, turned
back and became entangled with the second pair.
Mr Pendlebury, of Smithills, near Bolton, Greater
Manchester, was eliminated.
[From The Times , 16 May 1988]
Loose Cannons & Red Herrings
Readers should be familiar with Robert Claiborne's
earlier books, especially Our Marvelous Native
Tongue: The Life and Times of the English Language .
One might say that subtitling the present book A
Book of Lost Metaphors is an example of a loose
canon [sic]  unless metaphor is taken in its broadest
sensebut one is unlikely to find red herrings here: the
etymologies of a few hundred words and phrases are
given, many not readily findable in standard works of
reference.  The rationale behind referring to them as
lost arises from the author's observation of an unfortunate
state of affairs: because of an increasingly widespread
lack of familiarity with the basic, structural
elements of our cultureGreek and Roman mythology,
the Bible, literature, and ordinary historical
factpeople today are unable to discern the origins of
terms like aphrodisiac, Achilles [sic] heel or tendon,
meet one's Waterloo, sow dragon's teeth , and hand-writing
on the wall , to name a few.  There are many, of
course, but unaccountably, they are not the focus of
this book.
Claiborne investigates and reports on expressions
like sow one's wild oats , about which he tells us little
or nothing: the modern Latinate designation Avena
fatua came too many centuries after the original expression
to have any relevance to it, so why bring up
the information that fatua is Latin for `foolish': it was
also Latin for `wild,' which might be more to the
point.  In any event, it is hard to discern, from the arch
style affected in an attempt to make dull facts interesting,
just what is the origin of sow one's wild oats .  In
many entries, Claiborne labors the obvious, offering
little or nothing we do not already know, could easily
imagine, or for which the author offers no explanation.
Among examples of the first are spit and polish,
on the spot, on the square, stick one's neck out , etc.
Examples of the last include spill the beans, square the
circle, stalemate , etc.  Between these is an occasional
flash of useful wisdom, much of it pretty well covered
by other books of this type (which seem to be proliferating).
What is missing, for example, at square the circle ,
is the information that because the area of a circle is
mathematically calculated using pi , which is irrational,
there is no mathematical way of calculating the
dimensions of a square with the same area as that of a
given circle.  But that does not mean that such a square
cannot exist.  As for stalemate , which is related to
checkmate , would it not have been important to indicate
that the - mate part has nothing to do with English,
having been borrowed from checkmate which is a
loanword from Persian (and has nothing to do with
check , either).
Often, an entry offers nothing in the way of etymology
and merely explains the meaning.  Does any
reader need an entry like this one?
straddle .  When you straddle a horse, you've got
one leg on either side of the animal.  When a
politican straddles an issue, he's in much the same
position.
Some speculative suggestions, as the derivation (or
reinforcement) from Seidlitz powders for take a powder
are sheer nonsense.  Not all entries contain misleading,
dull, or incorrect information, but those that do
not are marked by a lack of originality.
Laurence Urdang
Word Maps
Dialect geography, a branch of dialectology, describes
certain features of the dialects of a language
and their distribution.  The field is about 100 years old.
Most prominent among its earliest practitioners in
England was Joseph Wright, who prepared the six-volume
English Dialect Dictionary , which was published
between 1898 and 1905; the best-known contemporary
British specialist is Harold Orton.  In America,
work proceeded space during the 1930s, largely under
the direction of Raven McDavid, Hans Kurath, and,
later, Harold Allen; more recently, Lee Pedersen and
others have investigated American English dialects.
Between 1948 and 1961, fieldworkers based at the University
of Leeds conducted the Survey of English Dialects,
which studied 313 localities in England (which,
as everyone ought to know, does not include Wales or
Scotland).  The present book is extracted from the two
major works that resulted from the Survey, The Linguistic
Atlas of England (1978) and A Word Geography
of England (1974), both under the direction of Harold
Orton, aided by Sanderson and Widdowson in the latter
effort.
People generally seem to find dialect study interesting.
One letter writer to The Times [21 June 1988]
reported:
Our close neighbour... in Bere Regis, who was
born in the village and who speaks with a delicious
Dorset burr, always uses I instead of me....
Well, it makes company for I and company for
she.  Another of his happy expressions is inner-wards,
meaning `since,' as in...I chucked him
out the door and he's not been back innerwards.
Another reported [same date]:
Let's get it right.  The Bristol for me is not I,
but oi.  When I was teaching there, the explanation
invariably given by boys brought to me for
scrapping in the playground was: Ee it oi, so oi
it ee.
The 100 maps selected for representation from the
Survey yield information on several hundred words,
some of which are clear variants, others quite different
lexical entities.  For instance, Map 34 shows the areas,
marked off by boundary lines, where the variants
chimley chimbley, chimmock, chimdey, chimbey , and
chimney occur.  Map 33 shows the distribution of child
(most of southern England) and of bairn (north of a
slightly wavy line between Boston, on the Wash to the
east, and Lancaster, on the west coast).
The authors have provided a brief introduction
which is easy to follow, a list of suggested readings,
and the names and addresses of the several institutions
and societies in Britain where readers may indulge a
more intensive interest in dialect study.  The maps are
clear, each occupying a full page, and the word information
is well set forth on them.  Where necessary,
brief but not cryptic explanations are provided of any
information that might seem to be out of the ordinary.
I have only one nit to pick with the authors.  In their
description of isoglosses , they write:
These are drawn to run midway between/
localities which were shown by the Survey of
English Dialects to use the different words or
pronunciations which are the subject of the map.
Although it is true that isoglosses, in effect, set off the
various areas where a particular usage was recorded,
more accurately an isogloss is drawn to connect sites
either where speakers employ both usages or where
speakers using one or the other live in very close proximity.
Hence, the term isogloss , from iso - `same' + gloss
`word,' to describe the line on a map where the terms
are of equal distribution.  Isoglosses are to dialect maps
what isobars and isotherms are to weather maps, what
isobaths are to geophysical maps of the oceans, etc.
The authors are not alone in getting this wrong: it is
incorrect in some dictionaries.
In those countries where dialect study is undertaken,
dialectologists observe that there are today
many factors militating against the strict maintenance
of older dialect boundaries: the standardization of terminology
as adopted by national periodicals, news
services, radio, and television; the establishment of
prestige dialects and, through the media, their
promulgation; and the huge population shifts that
have taken place, particularly in the U.S. since WWII.
Such shifts have been somewhat slower in England,
but seem now to be speeding up.  There are many
other, lesser factors at work, but taken together, all
tend toward standardization, especially as the older
speakers die off.  In some respects, it may not be long
before certain aspects of dialect geography will be
largely historical.  The importance of dialect is emphasized
regularly in the press, where we read about people
being killed, as in parts of India, because they use
the wrong shibboleths.
This book is a good introduction to the subject (in
England); those familiar with dialectology in
America, and those interested in the study in England
or, indeed, generally would be well advised to add
Word Maps to their libraries.
Laurence Urdang
American Literary Almanac
This is an interesting, useful reference book containing
information about the better-known writers of
America.  It is divided into eighteen chapters varying
in length, each dealing with a different aspect of the
authors and their works, among them,
Writers Related to Writers
Schooldays (which colleges and universities
spawned which writers)
American Literary Pseudonyms
American Literary Title Sources
Literary Cons: Hoaxes, Frauds, and Plagiarism
in American Literature
The Profession of Authorship:
Authors/Publishers/ Editors/Agents
Thrown to the Wolves: Reviews and Reviewers
These are supplemented by an extensive Bibliography
and a detailed Index.
As can be seen from the chapter headings, some of
the material is trivial, but nonetheless interesting for
that.  It is not at once apparent why the book is styled
an almanac, but that is unimportant: there is no
other book I know of that contains as much diverse
information about American writers as this one.  Its
readability and organization make it suitable for
browsingeven for reading straight throughso in
that respect, at least, it does not resemble books in the
Oxford Companion series.  It contains many photographs
of writers, some quite early; these enliven the
appearance of the book but accomplish little else, unless
one is interested in what Samuel Clemens looked
like at the age of 15 (as a printer's devil) or in the
appearance of Hart Crane standing in the middle of a
railroad track in Cleveland in 1916.
It is difficult to make any sensible connection between
the lives of authors and their creations.  A handful
might have led colorful existences, some are objects
of interest because they died early, committed suicide,
were related to (other) famous people, and so forth;
but such information seldom reveals as much about
their output as do the creations themselves, and in
certain cases one is probably better off not knowing
quite so much.
This book appears to have been diligently researched
and has much to recommend it as an adjunct
to most libraries, public and private, large and small,
general and specialized.
Laurence Urdang
Faculty protest against apartheid at Cornell.  [TV
news tease, WHEC, Rochester, .  Submitted
by .]
[the tenor] brings the opera to its climax in his final
suicide.  [From a review of Handel's Tamerlano in the  issue of Stereo Review.  Submitted by 
.]
I would like to make a couple of comments on
articles in the Autumn 1988 issue [XV,2].  Re the article
on Cuthbert, Dickens uses intercourse to mean `communication
between people' in A Christmas Carol
when Scrooge says I will not be the man I must have
been but for this intercourse to the third Spirit.
I would think that the words grand and stretch
would be known to more people than two of the words
the author gives as being familiar ( chippy and hootch ).
Incidentally, I seem to recall reading somewhere
that skins as slang for `dollars' dates from frontier days
when trappers used animal skins as currency, and is
therefore much older than early 20th-century Harlem.
...the party consisted of Beckett, Dame Peggy Ashcroft,
Harold Pinter, and the late Alan Webb.  [from The Times
Diary , , ]
Electronic theft by foreign and industrial spies and disgruntled
employees is costing U.S. companies billions and eroding their
international competitive advantage. That was the message delivered by
government and private security experts at an all-day conference on
corporate electronic espionage. "Hostile and even friendly nations
routinely steal information from U.S. companies and share it with their
own companies," said Noel D. Matchett, a former staffer at the federal
National Security Agency and now president of Information Security Inc.,
Silver Spring, Md. It "may well be" that theft of business data is "as
serious a strategic threat to national security" as it is a threat to
the survival of victimized U.S. firms, said Michelle Van Cleave, the
White House's assistant director for National Security Affairs.
The conference was jointly sponsored by the New York Institute of
Technology School of Management and the Armed Forces Communications and
Electronics Association, a joint industry-government trade group. Any
secret can be pirated, the experts said, if it is transmitted over the
air. Even rank amateurs can do it if they spend a few thousand dollars
for a commercially available microwave receiver with amplifier and a VCR
recorder. They need only position themselves near a company's satellite
dish and wait. "You can have a dozen competitors stealing your secrets
at the same time," Mr. Matchett said, adding : "It's a pretty good bet
they won't get caught." The only way to catch an electronic thief, he
said, is to set him up with erroneous information.
Even though electronic espionage may cost U.S. firms billions of
dollars a year, most aren't yet taking precautions, the experts said. By
contrast, European firms will spend $150 million this year on electronic
security, and are expected to spend $1 billion by 1992. Already many
foreign firms, especially banks, have their own cryptographers,
conference speakers reported. Still, encrypting corporate communications
is only a partial remedy.
One expert, whose job is so politically sensitive that he spoke on
condition that he wouldn't be named or quoted, said the expected influx
of East European refugees over the next few years will greatly increase
the chances of computer-maintenance workers, for example, doubling as
foreign spies. Moreover, he said, technology now exists for stealing
corporate secrets after they've been "erased" from a computer's memory.
He said that Oliver North of Iran-Contra notoriety thought he had erased
his computer but that the information was later retrieved for
congressional committees to read. No personal computer, not even the one
on a chief executive's desk, is safe, this speaker noted.
W. Mark Goode, president of Micronyx Inc., a Richardson, Texas, firm
that makes computer-security products, provided a new definition for
Mikhail Gorbachev's campaign for greater openness, known commonly as
glasnost. Under Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Goode said, the Soviets are openly
stealing Western corporate communications. He cited the case of a Swiss
oil trader who recently put out bids via telex for an oil tanker to pick
up a cargo of crude in the Middle East. Among the responses the Swiss
trader got was one from the Soviet national shipping company, which
hadn't been invited to submit a bid. The Soviets' eavesdropping paid
off, however, because they got the contract.
We don't know who is winning the drug war in Latin America, but we know who's losing it -- the press.
Over the past six months, six journalists have been killed and 10 kidnapped by drug traffickers or leftist guerrillas -- who often are one and the same -- in Colombia.
Over the past 12 years, at least 40 journalists have died there.
The attacks have intensified since the Colombian government began cracking down on the traffickers in August, trying to prevent their takeover of the country.
The slaughter in Colombia was very much on the minds of 450 editors and publishers from Latin America, the United States, the Caribbean and Canada attending the 45th general assembly of the Inter-American Press Association in Monterrey, Mexico, this week.
On Tuesday the conference got word of another atrocity, the assassination in Medellin of two employees of El Espectador, Colombia's second-largest newspaper.
The paper's local administrator, Maria Luz Lopez, was shot dead, and her mother wounded, while her car was stopped for a red light.
An hour later, the paper's circulation manager, Miguel Soler, was shot and killed near his home.
The drug lords who claimed responsibility said they would blow up the Bogota newspaper's offices if it continued to distribute in Medellin.
They bombed the Bogota offices last month, destroying its computer and causing $2.5 million in damage.
El Espectador has been a special target because of the extraordinary courage of its publisher and his staff.
At Monterrey, publisher Luis Gabriel Cano, although shaken by the murders, issued a statement saying: "We will not cease our fight against drug trafficking.
They want to terrify the press and in particular El Espectador because it has always been a torchbearer in this war."
This comes from a man whose brother, Guillermo, was murdered in 1986.
The publishers in Monterrey command no battalions, but they agreed to express their outrage with editorials in today's editions.
Many will use a common editorial.
A final statement yesterday said: "While some advances are being made in nations throughout the hemisphere, the state of press freedom in the Americas still must be regarded as grim as long as journalists and their families are subject to the crudest form of censorship: death by assassination."
The report charged that Panama's Manuel Noriega is not only in league with the drug traffickers but also is bullying the press as never before.
"Noriega has closed every independent newspaper, radio and television station and arrested, tortured or forced into exile a long list of reporters," the statement declared.
It added: "In Cuba, public enemy No. 1 of press freedoms in the hemisphere, repression of journalists both Cuban and foreign is worse than ever."
And in Nicaragua, promises of press freedom by the Sandinistas "have not materialized."
As it happens, the four countries cited, Colombia, Cuba, Panama and Nicaragua, are not only where the press is under greatest attack but also are linked by the drug trade and left-wing politics.
Noriega is close to Castro and may once have been his agent.
Sandinistas Thomas Borge and the Ortega brothers are Castro proteges; he backed their takeover of Nicaragua.
In Colombia, the drug-financed guerrillas trying to seize the country and destroy democracy include M-19, which Castro has clearly backed.
Robert Merkel, a former U.S. attorney handling drug indictments in Florida, doesn't think for a minute that Castro's much publicized trials of high officials engaged in the drug trade mean he has broken off with the Medellin drug cartel.
"If the cartel succeeds in blackmailing the Colombian authorities into negotiations, the cartel will be in control and Fidel can exploit his past relationships with them," he told the Journal's David Asman recently.
The struggle against the drug lords in Colombia will be a near thing.
This week, the government arrested Jose Abello Silva, said to be the fourth-ranking cartel leader.
He will probably be extradited to the U.S. for trial under an extradition treaty President Virgilia Barco has revived.
Later, another high-ranking trafficker, Leonidas Vargas, was arrested and 1,000 pounds of dynamite seized.
Mr. Barco has refused U.S. troops or advisers but has accepted U.S. military aid.
President Bush has agreed to meet within 90 days with Mr. Barco, President Alan Garcia of Peru and President Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia to discuss the drug problem.
It might not be a bad idea to do that sooner, rather than later.
After the Panama fiasco, they will need some reassurance.
Certainly, the Colombian press is much in need of that.
